--- Page 1 ---
202 4
ANNUAL REPORT
Boston Public Health Commission
January 1, 2024 - December 31, 2024

--- Page 2 ---
COMMISSIONER
Dr. Bisola Ojikutu
Commissioner of Public Health for the City of Boston and Executive Director of the
Boston Public Health Commission
BOARD OF HEALTH
Dr. Sandro Galea
Chair of the Boston Board of Health; Dean and Robert A. Knox Professor, Boston
University School of Public Health
Dr. Alastair Bell
President and CEO, BMC Health System
Dr. Elsie Taveras
Chief Community Health and Health Equity Officer, Mass General Brigham; Executive
Director, Kraft Center for Community Health at MGH
Rebecca Gutman
Vice President, Homecare 1199SEIU United Healthcare Workers East
Phillomin Laptiste
Chief People Officer, Community Care Cooperative
Guale Valdez
President and CEO, Mattapan Community Health Center
Gregory Wilmot
President and CEO, NeighborHealth
MISSION STATEMENT
To work in partnership with communities
to protect and promote the health
and well-being of all Boston residents,
especially those impacted by racism and
systemic inequities.

--- Page 3 ---
CONTENTS
1 Letter from the Commissioner
2 Introduction: Advancing Health Equity and Community
Well-being in 2024
5 BUREAUS, PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICES, AND CENTERS
6 Recovery Services Bureau (RSB)
8 Child Adolescent and Family Health Bureau (CAFHB)
10 Infectious Disease Bureau (IDB)
12 Community Initiatives Bureau (CIB)
14 Homeless Services Bureau (HSB)
16 Boston Emergency Medical Services (Boston EMS)
19 Office of Violence Prevention (OVP)
20 Office of Public Health Preparedness (OPHP)
21 Office of Racial Equity and Community Engagement (ORECE)
22 Center for Behavioral Health and Wellness (CBHW)
24 Center for Public Health Science and Innovation (PHSI)
26 Spotlight: Community Health Needs Assessment
& Improvement Planning

--- Page 4 ---
LETTER FROM THE COMMISSIONER
Dear Colleagues and Partners,
I want to take a moment to reflect on 2024, a year marked by both extraordinary challenges and
remarkable progress. Working with city departments, community organizations, and institutional
partners, we advanced our mission to protect and promote the health of all Bostonians—especially
those most affected by racism and systemic inequities. Guided by the foundational functions of public
health, we worked to strengthen systems, center equity, and advance community well-being.
We continued to monitor health trends and investigate pressing issues affecting our neighborhoods,
using timely, actionable data to guide decisions. We informed and educated residents about the factors
that shape health and mobilized cross-sector partnerships to create community-driven solutions.
Recognizing that health is shaped by more than biology, we addressed the social determinants of
health—like housing, economic stability, and access to care—through collaborative policy and planning.
We linked individuals to essential services, expanded behavioral health supports, and reinforced
emergency and recovery systems across the city.
Our approach in 2024 centered on prevention, inclusion, and empowerment, with a continued focus
on reducing disparities and supporting those most impacted by systemic inequities. This work is
made possible by Boston’s dedicated public health workforce—the backbone of a healthy city. Their
efforts span community engagement, workforce development, disease prevention, health education,
emergency response, and more. Often working behind the scenes, they bring compassion, expertise,
and equity to everything they do, ensuring that every resident—regardless of background or
circumstance—has the opportunity to live a long, healthy, and fulfilling life.
In 2025, we will have renewed energy and deep appreciation for the work you do every day to make
Boston a healthier, more equitable city for all. Thank you for your dedication, partnership, and service.
With appreciation,
Bisola Ojikutu MD MPH FIDSA
Commissioner of Public Health, City of Boston
Executive Director, Boston Public Health Commission
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 1

--- Page 5 ---
Introduction: Advancing Health Equity and
Community Well-being in 2024
highly dependent upon the conditions in the
communities where we live, work and play. Social
determinants of health, like economic mobility,
housing, and transportation, significantly impact
our overall life expectancy. To address these
health drivers, our solutions must be community-
driven; our data must be timely and actionable;
and our partnerships across public and private
sectors, communities, hospitals, health centers,
investors, and advocates must be strengthened.
Building on our commitment to comprehensive
well-being, the Commission also recognized
This past year, the Commission continued our
the urgent need to support the emotional
unwavering commitment to the health and
health of our youngest residents. We prioritized
well-being of all Boston residents, marked by
youth mental health, significantly expanding
significant milestones and impactful initiatives.
training programs for a diverse mental health
Our efforts were strategically focused on
workforce. We also enhanced critical support
addressing long-standing health disparities,
systems for Boston Public Schools staff and
strengthening public health infrastructure, and
proudly launched “Heads Up Boston,” a citywide
fostering resilient communities.
campaign designed to destigmatize mental health
challenges among youth. This campaign is for all
A cornerstone of our work in 2024 was the
Boston youth, but especially youth of color, those
introduction of Live Long and Well, Boston’s
who are marginalized, and those that identify as
first population health equity agenda. This
initiative aims to ensure every resident has
the opportunity to live a healthier life. This
endeavor was bolstered by a catalytic investment
from the Atrius Health Equity Foundation, in
collaboration with the Boston Community Health
Collaborative, which is fueling crucial efforts to
increase economic mobility in neighborhoods
that have historically faced low life expectancy.
By convening partners across sectors we will
address the three primary causes of premature
mortality in Boston: drug overdoses, preventable
cancers and cardiometabolic disease. This
agenda recognizes that health outcomes are
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 2

--- Page 6 ---
female or LGBTQ+. BPHC’s Health of Boston
Mental Health Report shows that more than
40% of Boston Public School students report
feeling persistent sadness and hopelessness, but
the data are even more severe for these groups.
The campaign has a tag line of “Because our
mental health matters.” It features videos of
Boston students talking about their day and the
importance of giving each other a “heads up.”
The campaign can be found on social media,
streaming video and audio platforms, radio
ads, and bus shelters in Boston. Others are
encouraged to join the movement to destigmatize
youth mental health by posting content of their
own and using #HeadsUpBoston.
Simultaneously, in our ongoing efforts to address
Boston’s commitment to its most vulnerable
the opioid crisis, our team continued to deploy
residents was further evident as our shelters
vital harm reduction resources, including
provided record levels of care and support.
naloxone and public health vending machines,
Concurrently, to strengthen emergency services,
strategically placed throughout the city. Beyond
Boston EMS bolstered its workforce through
immediate intervention, we awarded crucial
impactful initiatives. These included introducing
funding to community organizations, enabling
scholarships to diversify its ranks, opening new
them to connect individuals with much-needed
ambulance stations and a state-of-the-art training
treatment, and sustained a full continuum of
facility, and proudly graduating the first Cadet
care through dedicated outreach, comprehensive
Program cohort in more than two decades.
harm reduction strategies, and robust recovery
Beyond these critical emergency and support
programs.
services, maternal and child health remained
a critical focus for the Commission. The Boston
Community Perinatal Health Initiative (COPHI)
officially launched, successfully connecting
families with essential doula services during both
pregnancy and postpartum periods. Additional
investments were directed towards expanding
home visiting programs and advancing infant
mortality research, all with the explicit goal of
closing persistent disparities in birth outcomes,
particularly among Black and Latina women.
A powerful demonstration of community
empowerment and health equity advancement
occurred in March with the inaugural
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 3

--- Page 7 ---
EmpowerHer Black Women’s Health Health Centers and state officials, to maintain
Conference. More than 200 participants joined service access and promote health equity in the
this pivotal event, which issued a powerful call to affected community.
action to eliminate longstanding health inequities
Looking ahead and laying the groundwork for
and support holistic wellness among Black
future health initiatives, 2024 also saw the launch
women in Boston.
of the Community Health Needs Assessment
Reflecting a deeper, city-wide commitment (CHNA) through the Boston Community Health
to addressing community violence, the newly Collaborative. Insights gathered from this
established Office of Violence Prevention now comprehensive process will be instrumental
reports directly to the Executive Office. This in informing the city’s next Community Health
strategic realignment not only underscores a Improvement Plan (CHIP) in 2025.
public health approach to violence prevention but
This report highlights these major
also allows for expanded strategic capacity in this
accomplishments, along with the Commission’s
vital area.
vital, ongoing work to limit the spread of
And in response to the challenging Carney respiratory illnesses, prevent sexually transmitted
Hospital closure in Dorchester, the Commission infections, reduce environmental hazards,
swiftly activated the Mayor’s Health Line to help create career pathways in STEM and behavioral
residents find alternative care. Demonstrating health for youth, prevent chronic disease, and
proactive community engagement, we also formed much more, all contributing to a healthier, more
a Dorchester-area working group, collaborating equitable Boston.
with the Massachusetts League of Community
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 4

--- Page 8 ---
BUREAUS, PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICES,
AND CENTERS
The Boston Public Health Commission’s 2024 Annual Report highlights
major accomplishments across our bureaus, public health offices, and
centers. From expanding behavioral health workforce programs and
harm reduction efforts, to leading data innovation and equity-centered
community engagement, our work reflects our commitment to protecting
and promoting the health and well-being of all Boston residents. This report
provides a snapshot of key programs, strategic initiatives and partnerships
implemented in 2024.
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 5

--- Page 9 ---
Recovery Services Bureau (RSB)
RSB is committed to eliminating barriers to treatment and ensuring people
have access to the treatment and resources they need to begin their
recovery journey. Through outreach, engagement, advocacy, referrals, harm
reduction, and recovery services, the Recovery Services Bureau helps people
access the support they need.
The Commission is at the forefront of the City’s
response to the substance use crisis, and the
Recovery Services Bureau operates a continuum
of care, spanning outreach, harm reduction,
treatment, youth prevention, and community-
based programs.
RSB placed 2,389 individuals into substance
use treatment programs in 2024 and managed
a range of harm reduction programs, including
our syringe exchange efforts. These efforts
are crucial in reducing needle-sharing and the Staff from the Access, Harm Reduction, Overdose
spread of infectious diseases, including HIV and Prevention and Education (AHOPE) and Street
Hepatitis C, and they highlight our commitment Outreach programs focused on meeting people
to protecting public health. where they are, ensuring individuals have the
resources they need to stay safe and offering
Low-threshold shelter and permanent housing
harm reduction supplies. Our outreach work is
have been vital to providing safe, stabilizing
a fundamental part of how we connect with the
spaces for people who have been chronically
community and build trust with those we serve.
unsheltered with substance use disorder. Our
And to raise awareness about opioid overdoses
Mattapan Recovery Campus served over 890
in our community, RSB conducted overdose
people through our two programs: Entre Familia,
prevention trainings, teaching participants how to
reaching pregnant and postpartum women and
use naloxone and respond to overdoses.
children, and Transitions residential treatment
program with 65 beds. In 2024 we strengthened In 2024 RSB worked with the Center for Public
our partnerships to provide support to low- Health Science and Innovation to publish
threshold shelters, ensuring that people have the Boston Opioid Settlements Community
access to the care and support they need on Engagement Report, grounding investments
their recovery journey. These partners include in the voices of those impacted by the opioid
Boston Medical Center, Boston Health Care for epidemic. BPHC selected five community
the Homeless Program, Eliot Community Human organizations to receive grant funding to
Services, Victory Programs, Pine Street Inn, and distribute naloxone and also an administrator for
HomeStart. the Family Overdose Support Fund. In July BPHC
began funding the Newmarket BID Back2Work
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 6

--- Page 10 ---
program, providing workforce development for
people in early recovery, and also a medical
clinic operated by the Boston Health Care for the BY THE NUMBERS
Homeless Program.
2,389
We continued to focus on using data to drive
decisions and improve our services in 2024. This
individuals placed into substance use
includes initiatives like Boston Overdose Data
treatment programs
to Action (OD2A), a CDC-funded program that
expanded RSB’s surveillance capacity through
a publicly available data dashboard, placed 890
substance use navigators at three community
people served by our Mattapan
health centers, supported clinician training on
Recovery Campus
best practices for addiction treatment and pain
management, and provided overdose response
training and naloxone distribution. This also 23,441
includes RSB’s efforts to place naloxone
naloxone kits distributed at community
kiosks and public health vending machines in
events and to community members
communities that have been hit hardest by the
overdose epidemic according to city data. By
collecting and analyzing data, we’ve been able to
25,715
pinpoint areas of improvement in our programs,
make smarter decisions about resource individuals engaged by AHOPE and
allocation, and better meet the needs of those we Street Outreach staff
serve.
PROGRAMS
210
• Youth Prevention
overdose prevention trainings provided,
• Providing Access to Addictions Treatment,
reaching more than 3,100 people
Hope and Support (PAATHS)
• Street Outreach
• Safe & Sound Recovery Center
• Access, Harm Reduction, Overdose Prevention
and Education (AHOPE)
• Engagement Center
• Mattapan Recovery Campus: Entre Familia and
Transitions
• Outpatient Treatment Partnership
• Strategic Partnerships (including Opioid
Settlement Funds, Community Engagement,
and Overdose Data to Action)
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 7

--- Page 11 ---
Child Adolescent and Family Health Bureau
(CAFHB)
With 90 staff and 12 programs,
CAFHB focuses on perinatal, BY THE NUMBERS
early childhood, and adolescent
health equity. Through our Child 551
Adolescent Health Division and
individuals enrolled into Boston Healthy
Healthy Start Systems Division,
Start Initiative case management and care
we support children, youth,
coordination services, including 149 pregnant
and families—especially those
women, 168 women between pregnancies, and
impacted by racism—with services,
234 infants/children
partnerships, and advocacy. This
includes clinical and client services,
case management, health education 110
and promotion, and organizational
students, of which 60% of were multilingual
capacity-building in homes, health
and 100% were students of color, enrolled in the
centers, and school-based clinics.
Boston Area Healthy Education Center
In 2024 CAFHB launched the Fetal Infant
Mortality Review (FIMR) program, making 102
progress in staffing, creating protocols, and
youth successfully completed the 7-week the
networking nationally. Highlights include
Summer Enrichment Program, with an 86%
hiring a Senior Program Manager, conducting
a landscape analysis with the Office of Public completion rate
Health Innovation, and mentoring with
Kalamazoo, Michigan.
1,083
The Boston Healthy Start Initiative collaborated
families served by Healthy Baby Healthy Child,
with the Little Cocoa Bean Company and
of those families 309 had live births and 268
Fettle and Feast to pilot an 8-week postpartum
birthing families decided to breastfeed
meal delivery service for 15 families. The
program aimed to provide nutritional and
emotional support to new mothers and families, 171
addressing a critical gap in postpartum
doulas trained in culturally responsive care,
care. The Community-Based Perinatal Health
in partnership with 11 community organizations
Initiative received a $3.5 million, 3-year grant to
through the Community-Based
enhance doula support and training. In 2024, the
fully staffed team integrated services with Healthy
Perinatal Health Initiative
Start and handled 132 family referrals.
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 8

--- Page 12 ---
DIVISIONS & PROGRAMS
Child Adolescent Health Division
• Boston Area Health Education Center (BAHEC)
• Health Resource Center (HRC)
• Peer Leadership Institute (PLI)
• School Based Health Centers (SBHC)
• Start Strong
• Youth Development Network (YDN)
Healthy Start Systems Division
• Boston Healthy Start Initiative
• Community-Based Perinatal Health Initiative
(COPHI)
• Early Childhood Mental Health (ECMH)
• Healthy Baby Healthy Child (HBHC)
• Healthy Start in Housing (HSiH)
• Father Friendly
• Fetal Infant Mortality Review (FIMR)
To support youth, the Boston Area Health
Education Center (BAHEC) developed a • Welcome Family
behavioral health career pipeline. In 2024
they hosted seasonal afterschool programs
and redesigned their summer enrichment
program to focus on mental health. The Start
Strong program, which seeks to give youth the
tools to create a healthy social environment,
experienced major growth in its social media
campaign, reaching millions of young people
and significantly increasing engagement across
platforms. Instagram impressions hit 12.3
million, while TikTok saw over 2 million views
and 313,000 likes through youth-focused content.
In Summer 2024, CAFHB’s enrichment program
provided 100 Boston youth with paid jobs via
Successlink and hosted activities at UMass
Boston. Youth participated in individualized and
collaborative programming, including creative
electives and field trips. The program also
awarded scholarships to alumni, supporting their
post-high school ambitions.
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 9

--- Page 13 ---
Infectious Disease Bureau (IDB)
From sexually transmitted infections to tuberculosis to new emerging
diseases, IDB addresses a range of issues related to preventing and treating
infectious diseases to reduce their impact, prevent morbidity and create
healthier lives for Boston residents.
In 2024, IDB prioritized approaches and
initiatives that aimed to combat stigma and
discrimination, provide trustworthy and BY THE NUMBERS
accurate education, and increase access to care
and supportive services for Boston residents,
11
particularly those disproportionately impacted
by infectious diseases due to racism, xenophobia, trainings across diverse communities on
transphobia, homophobia, and other systems of various infectious diseases
oppression.
5,218
Education and Outreach staff launched an award-
winning media campaign, Safe is Sexy, and total clients engaged through the
the team provided outreach at 40 community
Ryan White Part A HIV/AIDS program
events across Boston and ran 11 trainings on
various infectious disease topics across diverse
3,600+
audiences. The team also marched in the City’s
Pride Parade and led BPHC colleagues in giving Boston residents provided group and
out 800 bags of educational and sexual wellness
individual level interventions, 18% were
materials. IDB had two successful tuberculosis
unhoused and 70% were from communities
(TB) screening events and several TB trainings
of color
across high-risk settings.
The Ryan White Planning Council successfully
538
completed its first year of Ending the HIV
Epidemic funding for the Someone You Know new clients enrolled into
and Love Campaign, including the management the Ryan White Dental program and paid for
of a successful Massachusetts Bay Transit over 4,135 dental claims
Authority advertising campaign with over seven
million impressions across digital liveboards,
6,100
subway interior posters, and a mobile network
of advertisements. The campaign also included visits by registered nurses and doctors
a film screening and panel discussion at
to provide care to patients in
Suffolk University for National Black HIV/AIDS
tuberculosis clinics
Awareness Day with over 100 attendees.
BBOOSSTTOONN P PUUBBLLICIC H HEEAALLTTHH C COOMMMMISISSSIOONN || 22002244 AANNNNUUAALL RREEPPOORRTT || 1100

--- Page 14 ---
The Ryan White Prevention and Early
Intervention Services program provided $1.4
million in funding to 11 agencies within Boston
for community-based prevention of HIV, Hepatitis
C and Sexually Transmitted Infections.
The Ryan White Dental Program experienced
higher client engagement than in previous years,
thanks to strengthened partnerships with case
managers. the program enrolled 16% more clients
and paid 10% more dental claims than in 2023.
Finally, IDB’s Communicable Disease Control
Division supported 61 individuals with TB
disease in accessing appropriate medical care
and social supports, conducted case and contact
investigations associated with hepatitis A,
pertussis, varicella, and other communicable
diseases.
PROGRAMS
• HIV/STI Prevention
• Early Intervention Services
• Communicable Disease Control (CDC)
• Tuberculosis (TB) Case Management and
Clinical Support
• Ending the HIV Epidemic
• Education and Community Engagement
• HIV/STI Services, including Ryan White Part A
Services
• Ryan White Part A Case Management Training
Program
• Ryan White Part A Planning Council Support
• Ryan White Dental
BBOOSSTTOONN P PUUBBLLICIC H HEEAALLTTHH C COOMMMMISISSSIOONN || 22002244 AANNNNUUAALL RREEPPOORRTT || 1111

--- Page 15 ---
Community Initiatives Bureau (CIB)
The Community Initiatives Bureau implements policies and services that
prevent illness and promote health, with a focus on the social determinants
of health. CIB staff work with community members and organizations,
other city agencies, landlords, academic and health care institutions, small
businesses, families, and preschool- to college-aged students to make a
healthier Boston.
In 2024, the Mayor’s Health Line (MHL)
advanced its mission to promote health equity
BY THE NUMBERS
by strengthening partnerships and expanding
culturally and linguistically appropriate outreach.
In response to the Carney Hospital closure, MHL
1,434
staff worked closely with stakeholders to help
applicants enrolled
affected patients and staff transition to new health
into Health Connector or MassHealth
insurance coverage and find new providers.
coverage, including 630 head of households
Through the CDC’s Building Our Largest
who speak a language other than English
Dementia (BOLD) Infrastructure Public Health
Program grant, 92 Boston residents living with
7,018
dementia and their caregivers were connected
to free care planning services, and 130 medical free fitness classes hosted
providers were trained in dementia screening, in partnership with Boston Parks and
diagnosing, and making treatment referrals for
Recreation, taking place in Boston parks
Alzheimer’s and other dementias.
and online
The Boston Healthy Child Care Initiative
developed two new Learning Collaboratives:
375
Farm to Early Care and Education (ECE) and
home visits for inspections
Nutrition in the First 5 Years. We worked
and asthma education completed by the
closely with family childcare educators, parents,
Asthma Prevention and Control and
community partners, farmers, universities,
Breathe Easy at Home Program
the City’s Office of Early Childhood, and state
partners on development. The Five-Session Farm
to ECE collaborative was piloted in June with
487
eight educators serving 66 children.
cases responded to by the Environmental
The Environmental and Occupational Health and Occupational Health Division about
Division continues to play an active role in
potential health hazards in homes,
supporting environmental public health policy
businesses, and public spaces
efforts, particularly in representing public
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 12

--- Page 16 ---
health in wider city climate change mitigation
and adaptation/preparation activities. The most
recent of these is participation in the city’s
Climate Council and work on the updated Boston
Climate Action Plan as well as being part of the
steering committee of Boston’s Cross-Agency
Climate Resilience Workgroup. The Division
also made significant progress in 2024 on
records management and data modernization
to improve services to the public and boost staff
performance, converting 30 file cabinets of lead
case management records into digital files.
DIVISIONS & PROGRAMS
• Chronic Disease Division
• Healthy Homes and Community Support
Division
• Environmental and Occupational Health
Division
• Mayor’s Health Line
• South End Fitness Center
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 13

--- Page 17 ---
Homeless Services Bureau (HSB)
The Homeless Services Bureau provides emergency shelter services and
related ancillary support to homeless individuals in Boston. Emergency
shelter services are at the core of HSB, providing low-barrier shelter access to
any homeless individual with no restrictions related to substance addiction
or mental health acuity. The goal of our work is to make homelessness rare,
brief, and non-recurring.
Operating two 24/7 emergency shelters, we
provide dignity, care, and a path forward with
clean accommodations, hot meals, and essential BY THE NUMBERS
services. Demand for shelter has increased steadily
since the COVID-19 pandemic, with 2024 seeing
nightly shelter census operating at 16% over bed 4,267
capacity. The urgent demand for these resources
individuals served
underscores the importance of our team’s
across all programs
innovative approaches to homelessness in Boston.
To support our guests HSB provides an array
4,028
of services including: workforce development
to help guests learn employment skills and find individuals provided
employment within the community; food and shelter placement
nutrition services which provide three meals per
day and teach basic kitchen skills; triage supports
159
to individuals to avoid becoming homeless by
reconnecting with family/community networks individuals diverted
and explore alternatives to shelter; and housing from shelter
services to find permanent housing and provide
follow-up services to ensure that individuals do
336
not return to homelessness.
individuals placed
In 2024 HSB successfully concluded its low-
into permanent housing
threshold shelter collaboration with the Recovery
Services Bureau providing temporary, low-
threshold shelter to 28 individuals previously 299
residing in the encampment at “Mass and Cass.”
placements
At the time of program closure, approximately
via family reunification
69% of these guests were successfully placed
on pathways out of shelter, including 31% to
permanent housing destinations.
BBOOSSTTOONN P PUUBBLLICIC H HEEAALLTTHH C COOMMMMISISSSIOONN || 22002244 AANNNNUUAALL RREEPPOORRTT || 1144

--- Page 18 ---
HSB’s efforts to provide shelter triage and
diversion services continue to be a fixture since
successful family and community reunification
is the most successful housing outcome and
pathway out of shelter. Additionally, these services
prevented the homelessness of 159 individuals
who were successfully diverted from entering
shelter at all.
PROGRAMS
• Emergency Shelter Operations
• Housing
• Front Door Triage
• Behavioral Health
• Workforce Development/Serving Ourselves
• Food and Nutrition Services/Quincy Street
Kitchen
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 15

--- Page 19 ---
Boston Emergency Medical Services
(Boston EMS)
Boston Emergency Medical Services (Boston EMS), the primary emergency
medical services provider for the city, is a nationally recognized leader in
the field of pre-hospital emergency medicine. Boston EMS leverages the
latest advances in both medicine and technology to bring high-quality,
compassionate care to the people of Boston. Boston EMS plays a key role in the
City’s emergency preparedness efforts and provides community programming
designed to educate the public about important health and safety topics.
Boston EMS is the city’s primary pre-hospital
emergency care provider, covering 48 square BY THE NUMBERS
miles and supporting a daytime population of
1.2 million. Peak operations included 21 Basic
140,701
Life Support and five Advanced Life Support
ambulances deployed from 17 stations. As
clinical incidents responded to
the City’s municipal ambulance service, we
respond to 9-1-1 clinical incidents across all
166,422
neighborhoods, 365 days a year.
ambulance responses
In 2024 we expanded our ability to serve
(multiple ambulances responding
individuals experiencing a behavioral health
to single incidents)
emergency by doubling the number of staffed
squad units from two to four. Each unit is
comprised of an Emergency Medical Technician 93,774
(EMT) and a Behavioral Health Clinician. The
patient transports
program has also expanded from 4 days a week to
7 days a week from 8 in the morning to midnight.
Boston EMS was the first ambulance service in 1,158
Massachusetts to secure approval from the State
Alternative Response Model
Office of EMS to implement Mobile Integrated
Patient Encounters
Health (MIH) Emergency Department Avoidance
programs.
98
Our Community Assistance Team, comprised
of two EMTs in a squad unit providing on scene new uniformed members hired, including
treatment and referral, are now able to administer Cadets and EMT-Recruits, a 36% increase
Suboxone and transport individuals directly to compared to 2023
substance use disorder urgent care programs.
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 16

--- Page 20 ---
Boston EMS deployed an additional 24-hour In March of 2024, the city officially opened
ambulance to the Dorchester neighborhood the newly renovated Boston EMS Training
to mitigate the impact of the Carney Hospital Center, which includes the addition of a two-
closure. This ensured residents received bay ambulance station at 201 Rivermoor Street
uncompromised access to pre-hospital care. The in West Roxbury. This new, state-of-the-art
added ambulance allowed us to ensure response educational complex allows Boston EMS to
times for Dorchester were not impacted. continue to recruit and develop highly trained
EMTs and Paramedics. The new station also
enhances emergency medical coverage for
residents. Boston EMS graduated its first Cadet
program in nearly two decades, creating a
pipeline to employment as EMTs.
PROGRAMS
• Special Operations and Emergency
Preparedness
• Professional Development and Community
Initiatives
• Support Services
• Operations
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 17

--- Page 21 ---
Public Health Offices and Centers
Delivering effective public health planning, dependable daily operations,
and timely responses to emerging challenges requires a dedicated and
skilled workforce. Boston Public Health Commission staff—across bureaus,
frontline services, and essential administrative functions such as human
resources, legal counsel, information technology, operations, finance, and
public safety—work tirelessly to advance our mission. Throughout the year,
we undertake special projects and system enhancements to strengthen
our workforce and enhance our capacity to serve Boston’s residents. From
advocacy by our policy and intergovernmental relations teams, to increased
media attention and public health campaigns by our communications team,
to new funding awards secured by our grants development office, our teams
were hard at work.
To foster a diverse, inclusive, and high-performing workforce the Human
Resources Office led the design and rollout of the Commission’s first-ever
performance management pilot. This effort established a foundation for
how we define, discuss, and support performance across the Commission.
Additionally, the Consortium for Professional Development developed
the inaugural People Leaders Training Series. Examples of infrastructure
enhancements include the launching of six real-time dashboards, led by
Information Technology Services in collaboration with programmatic
teams. And through our Data Modernization Initiative and the development
of a cloud-based Data Lake, we have enhanced our ability to manage and
analyze public health data.
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 18

--- Page 22 ---
Office of Violence Prevention (OVP)
The Office of Violence Prevention, launched in November 2024, was created
to strengthen collaboration with the Mayor’s Office to provide a healing
response when gun violence occurs, work with the most impacted, engage
residents in prevention, train workers on violence prevention, and address
gender-based violence.
For many years, BPHC has directly worked
with residents aged 17- to 24-years old who are
most impacted by and involved in community BY THE NUMBERS
gun violence. New state and city investments
have allowed us to serve residents of all ages,
261
resulting in the creation of our Life Course Health
Unit. In 2024, we developed a new program, the residents most impacted
Domestic, Sexual, and Gender-Based Violence
by or most involved in gun violence served
Prevention Initiative. This was created based on
by the Life Course Health Unit
Boston’s ongoing violence prevention planning
and community engagement efforts, including
16 listening sessions and over 300 adult and 284
youth survey respondents, and planning work
service providers
with Family Justice Center Leadership Council.
trained in trauma-informed
The new initiative focuses on providing a holistic,
and equitable approaches
equity-centered prevention of and response to
domestic, sexual, and gender-based violence.
97
The Violence Intervention and Prevention (VIP)
Initiative engaged 3,000 residents through youth and young adults
relationships with 10 partnerships: Mattapan and 166 parents/caregivers trained in
Teen Center, Project RIGHT, Madison Park
substance use prevention
Development Corporation, Teen Empowerment,
Boston Ministries, Speak Up & Speak Out, We
Better Together, Transformational Prison Project, 156
the Suffolk County District Attorney’s Office,
incidents of community gun violence where
and BPD Districts C11, B2, B3, and C6. And
the Community Healing Response Network
the Capacity Building and Training Initiative,
in partnership with the Center for Behavioral provided trauma and healing support
Health and Wellness, launched the City Learning
Collaborative for seven youth- and family-serving
programs to deliver trauma-informed and equitable
services and strengthen workforce well-being.
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 19

--- Page 23 ---
PROGRAMS
• Domestic, Sexual, and Gender-based Violence
Prevention Initiative
• Violence Intervention and Prevention Initiative
• Community Healing Response Network
• Life Course Health Unit
• Capacity Building and Training Initiative
Office of Public Health Preparedness
(OPHP)
The Office of Public Health
BY THE NUMBERS
Preparedness works to enhance
community, public health, and
healthcare system resilience to 2,842
prepare for, respond to, and recover
encounters at medical tents, 131 patient
from emergencies that impact health
encounters at 10 hospitals, and 16 admitted
and access to healthcare.
patients for the Boston Marathon
OPHP activated the Medical Intelligence Center
2,300
(MIC) in the City of Boston for the 2024 Boston
Marathon. OPHP provided ongoing situational small space heaters and warming blankets
awareness in support of public health and
distributed to 60 community partners in
healthcare operations and provided technical
Roxbury, Mattapan, East Boston,
assistance for Emergency Tracking System (ETS)
and Dorchester
operations at hospitals, ensuring mental health,
behavioral health, and human services resources
are monitored and deployed appropriately. 345,567
OPHP led a virtual tabletop exercise with the pieces of personal protective equipment
Boston Healthcare Preparedness Coalition (HPC) distributed across the city
to strengthen regional mass casualty incident
response. Participants reviewed multidisciplinary
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 20

--- Page 24 ---
response strategies, defined essential information
for a shared operating picture, assessed mass
notification systems, pinpointed gaps, and set
training priorities. The exercise tested Boston’s
public health and healthcare response capabilities
while building stronger collaboration among
HPC members. Fifty-eight professionals from
community health centers, EMS, hospitals,
long-term care, state and local public health,
emergency management, home health, and
healthcare coalitions actively engaged in the
session.
Office of Racial Equity and Community
Engagement (ORECE)
The Office of Racial Equity and
BY THE NUMBERS
Community Engagement’s purpose
is to establish and sustain racial and
health equity as core principles in 10
the BPHC policies, operations, and
cultural events were planned and hosted
decision-making. We do this through
by the Office of Racial Equity and
strategic planning, visioning, and
Community Engagement
relationship building.
21
ORECE launched several key initiatives internally
and externally over the past year in alignment
technical assistance training requests
with our mission to establish and sustain racial
were received by ORECE from external
and health equity as core principles in the BPHC
organizations and Boston City Hall
policies, operations, and decision-making.
In partnership with two nonprofit organizations,
25
ORECE launched the Generational Health
Scholarship Program which supports BPHC managers and directors per session
approximately 70 Black, Indigenous, (and) People received training on understanding their role
of Color Boston students pursuing careers in in supporting an anti-racist culture
STEM, public health, behavioral health and the
at the Commission
health sciences--helping to advance educational
equity and cultivate a more inclusive workforce
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 21

--- Page 25 ---
pipeline. We also started training sessions with
91 City of Boston staff, focused on educating City
leaders with tools to address social determinants
of health through a racial equity lens.
At BPHC, ORECE hosted its inaugural Women’s
History Month Breakfast in March, bringing
together approximately 60 employees to celebrate
and honor the contributions of women across
our workforce. Additionally, in collaboration
with BPHC’s Consortium for Professional
Development, ORECE contributed to the
inaugural People Leaders Training Series.
Center for Behavioral Health and
Wellness (CBHW)
The Center for Behavioral Health and Wellness builds a more equitable,
trauma-informed system in Boston by strengthening the workforce,
reducing stigma, and supporting communities—ensuring all residents,
especially youth, have access to culturally responsive behavioral health care.
CBHW’s priorities are to: recruit, expand, and program launched in the spring, enrolling
train a diverse, culturally competent, trauma- students to support behavioral health workforce
informed behavioral health workforce that diversification. Two Boston Public Schools
reflects Boston’s communities; deliver public were added to the Children’s Wellness Initiative
communications that promote wellness, address through the expanded Behavioral Health
stigma, build skills to respond to behavioral Workforce Project in partnership with Franciscan
health and substance use issues; and confront Children’s Hospital, now reaching eight schools
historic and ongoing barriers to care—initially and 115 students.
focusing on youth behavioral health— and
Youth programming expanded through BPHC-
strengthen capacity and deliver training
BPS partnerships. We worked with Flourish
programs in behavioral health citywide through
Agenda to pilot Trauma-Informed School System
collaboration with community partners.
Transformation at 10 schools using Healing-
In 2024, CBHW advanced workforce development Centered Engagement to improve school climate.
to strengthen Boston’s behavioral health capacity. Eight Boston Public Schools actively participated
The UMass Boston Access to Mental Health in Flourish Agenda’s Trauma-Informed School
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 22

--- Page 26 ---
BY THE NUMBERS
11.5 million
impressions on the “Heads Up” campaign
across digital and public platforms citywide
60+
youth and caregivers reached
by the Family Van’s youth focused arts and
wellness communication
and outreach initiative
27
Therapeutic Mentor and
27 Mental Health Counselor students
accepted at the University of Massachusetts
Boston’s Access to Mental Health program
System Transformation Healing-Centered
Engagement (HCE) training. The Family Van
engaged 60+ youth and caregivers in arts and
wellness culturally resonant workshops, ending
with public exhibits and panels.
CBHW launched the “Heads Up Boston”
campaign with diverse youth to reduce stigma
and promote peer support, and the CopeCode
Club, run by the Recovery Services Bureau and
supported by CBHW, fostered youth leadership
and early substance use intervention to build a
more inclusive behavioral health environment
citywide.
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 23

--- Page 27 ---
Center for Public Health Science and
Innovation (PHSI)
The Center for Public Health Science and Innovation uses state-of-the-art
methodologies in research, surveillance, evaluation, and reporting to inform
evidence-based decision making across BPHC and to support community
data needs with an antiracist health equity lens.
PHSI produced high impact reports and particularly youth of color, helping to catalyze
publications, including four Health of Boston a $21 million investment in behavioral health
reports focused on mental health, substance use, services for youth and families across the city. We
access to care, and community assets. These produced more than 240 analytic reports to
reports highlighted critical trends across specific support surveillance and operational needs. PHSI
Boston populations. For example, the inaugural staff also elevated critical health equity themes
Mental Health Report revealed a sharp rise in land presented at 14 public health conferences
sadness, hopelessness, and anxiety among youth, and publishing three peer-reviewed publications.
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 24

--- Page 28 ---
Finally, the Center advanced public health science
through innovative methods and strong cross
sector data partnerships. For example, it revealed
BY THE NUMBERS
disparities in overdose, cancer, and COVID-19
mortality often hidden within broader racial
categories by linking census and vital records
100
data to produce disaggregated, age adjusted
mortality rates. These data were foundational biweekly wastewater surveillance
in informing Live Long and Well, Boston’s first briefs completed
population health equity agenda. PHSI also
collaborated with Boston teaching hospitals to
guide new, community-informed data collection 79
for the 2025 Boston Community Health Needs
weekly, monthly, and quarterly reports
Assessment, uncovering previously unmeasured
for BPHC bureaus
concerns about resident health barriers.
20+
new data innovation collaborations
with academic institutions, hospitals, nonprofit
organizations, and community partners
1
new Overdose Data to Action Dashboard developed
with RSB
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 25

--- Page 29 ---
Spotlight: Community Health Needs
Assessment & Improvement Planning
The Community Health Needs Assessment is conducted by the Boston
Community Health Collaborative, a partnership of health institutions,
community organizations, and the Boston Public Health Commission
to improve the health and well-being of Boston residents by aligning
community health assessment requirements and improvement planning
efforts.
In 2024, in collaboration with the Boston
Community Health Collaborative (BCHC), our
office successfully planned and implemented
BY THE NUMBERS
a citywide community health survey to better
understand the top health needs, challenges,
strengths, and priorities of Boston residents.
1,900+
The survey was translated into nine languages.
Through in-person outreach at over 40 responses were collected
community events we gathered valuable input
for the Boston Community
from residents across the city. These insights
Health Assessment survey,
directly informed the 2025 Boston Community
offered in English and
Health Needs Assessment Report and will guide
eight additional languages
future health planning efforts.
We also convened cross-sector partners
through the BCHC Steering Committee and 60+
three issue-focused work groups. These groups
health measures
worked together to strengthen connections,
were selected to analyze trends
align strategies, and use data more effectively
in their efforts to improve community health. in health outcomes, disparities,
This collaborative structure has helped partners and social determinants
identify shared priorities, advocate more of Boston residents’ health
effectively, and advance health equity in Boston.
Lastly, we leveraged public health data to
inform the Community Health Assessment and
improvement planning process. Project staff led determinants of health. These data-driven insights
the development of a comprehensive indicator are foundational to our efforts to understand
set—over 60 health measures—used to analyze community needs and develop targeted, impactful
trends in health outcomes, disparities, and social strategies for improving health in Boston.
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 26

--- Page 30 ---
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 27

--- Page 31 ---
The 2024 Annual Report of the Boston Public
Health Commission was produced by the Boston
Public Health Commission’s Executive Office and
Communications Office.
All materials in this document are in the public
domain and may be reproduced and copied
without permission.
Recommended citation: The 2024 Annual
Report of the Boston Public Health Commission
Boston Public Health Commission
For inquiries, please contact:
Boston Public Health Commission
1010 Massachusetts Avenue
Boston, MA 02118
Phone: 617-534-5395
Email: info@bphc.org
boston.gov/bphc
Please consider the environment before printing
this report.
BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH COMMISSION | 2024 ANNUAL REPORT | 28