--- Page 1 ---
LIVE LONG
AND WELL
BOSTON’S POPULATION HEALTH
EQUITY AGENDA

--- Page 2 ---
MISSION STATEMENT
To work in partnership with communities
to protect and promote the health
and well-being of all Boston residents,
especially those impacted by racism and
systemic inequities.

--- Page 3 ---
II | LIVE LONG AND WELL
LETTER FROM MAYOR WU
Dear Neighbors,
At the City, we’re working to make Boston a home for everyone. That means investing in the health, safety,
and wellness of all of our residents. Through our health equity agenda, we’re working to continue shrinking
the longevity gap and make sure that all our residents have the opportunity to live long and live well in
Boston.
That’s why we’re investing in better access to the resources that we know can lead to longer, healthier lives
for every family in every neighborhood. We’re working with our residents to plant the seeds of health equity
in every corner of our city.
Whether we’re helping nearly 700 families find their first home; transitioning Boston Housing Authority communities to be fossil-fuel free
by 2030; providing more than 10,000 paid summer jobs to young people in our Boston Public Schools; or reducing violence and addressing
trauma to make Boston the safest major city in the country, everything we’re doing is about making Boston a home for everyone.
In this report, we describe our Live Long and Well population health equity agenda. By working to close the life expectancy gap citywide,
we can also make Boston a healthier, more equitable city for everyone.
This is work that we are proud to be doing in partnership with hospitals and health centers, community organizations and local businesses.
I’m grateful to our leadership at the City, Commissioner Dr. Bisola Ojikutu and her team at the Boston Public Health Commission, for
tackling these health disparities at their root. And, of course, I’m grateful to the community here in Boston and across every sector for
working with us to identify the gaps and the strategies to move forward.
Sincerely,
Michelle Wu
Mayor of Boston

--- Page 4 ---
III | LIVE LONG AND WELL
LETTER FROM THE COMMISSIONER
Dear Fellow Bostonians,
Though our city is rich with healthcare resources, we continue to experience significant health inequities by
race and by neighborhood. These inequities are a result of a long history of structural racism and decades of
disinvestment in communities of color.
The most glaring of these inequities is the disparity in life expectancy. For more than 10 years it was often repeated
that a 33-year difference in life expectancy existed between neighborhoods 2.3 miles apart, in Roxbury and in
the Back Bay. In 2023, we made it a priority to update these data. We found that the 33-year difference in life
expectancy between Roxbury and Back Bay had decreased and is now 23 years.
Progress has been made. This administration has made significant investments in factors that impact our health. However, we have much work
ahead. In addition to Roxbury, our analysis revealed communities with low life expectancy and high premature mortality in other neighborhoods
throughout our city – in Mattapan, Dorchester, East Boston, and Jamaica Plain.
Simply documenting this long-standing inequity is both insufficient and irresponsible. We must continue to act to ensure that all Bostonians can
live long, healthy, high-quality lives.
Live Long and Well is Boston’s first citywide population health equity agenda. Our agenda convenes partners across sectors to address the three
primary causes of premature mortality in Boston: drug overdoses, preventable cancers and cardiometabolic disease. This agenda recognizes that
health outcomes are highly dependent upon the conditions in the communities where we live, work and play. Social determinants of health, like
economic mobility, housing, and transportation, significantly impact our overall life expectancy. To address these health drivers, our solutions
must be community-driven; our data must be timely and actionable; and our partnerships across public and private sectors, communities,
hospitals, health centers, investors, and advocates must be strengthened.
I hope Live Long and Well helps all Bostonians understand the City’s commitment to making our city a better place to live for everyone. We cannot
do this without you. I want to express my gratitude for our collective progress, and I am confident that we will continue to create positive change
in the years ahead.
In partnership,
Bisola Ojikutu, MD MPH FIDSA
Commissioner of Public Health, City of Boston
Executive Director, Boston Public Health Commission

--- Page 5 ---
IV | LIVE LONG AND WELL
TABLE OF CONTENTS
5 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
1 INTRODUCTION
1 Our City, Our People
3 Live Long and Well
4 BPHC’s Mission and Work
5 HEALTH EQUITY ACROSS BOSTON
5 Social Determinants of Health
5 Racism and Health
6 A Citywide Agenda
8 COMMUNITY COLLABORATION
8 Community Engagement and Empowerment
10 Our Collaborators
11 LEADING CAUSES OF PREMATURE MORTALITY
13 Drug Overdose
15 Cardiometabolic Disease
17 Preventable Cancers
19 LIVING WELL AT EVERY AGE
19 Mental Health
22 Infant and Maternal Health
24 Healthy Aging
26 JOIN US!
27 ENDNOTES
30 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

--- Page 6 ---
INTRODUCTION
Boston is a vibrant, diverse, and thriving city. Our residents, on average, BOSTON’S RICH DIVERSITY
are healthier and live longer than residents of most other U.S. cities. But
Total population in 2023: 653,8334
throughout our city, there are stark and persistent health inequities by race, by
ethnicity and by neighborhood. The Boston Public Health Commission’s Live
• Asian: 10.0%
Long and Well agenda, our city’s first population health equity agenda, reflects
• Black: 21.5%
our commitment to eliminating gaps in health outcomes and creating a city
• Latinx: 18.9%
where all residents can live healthy, long lives.
• White: 44.5%
Despite this diversity, racial and
OUR CITY, OUR PEOPLE But even in our resource-rich city, there are
ethnic groups are concentrated in
persistent and pervasive health inequities.
Boston is an extraordinary place to 23 of Boston’s 207 census tracts.
live, learn, and work. It is a diverse and Life expectancy varies widely based on
flourishing city that attracts people from where you live in Boston. In 2007, there
all over the world. When it comes to health was a 33-year gap between census tracts
care, Boston is a global medical hub with in Roxbury and in the Back Bay.2 By 2021,
exceptional resources. A remarkable 96% of this gap had narrowed, but there was still
Bostonians are insured, and the average life an unacceptable 23-year difference in life
expectancy of our residents is just over 80 expectancy between census tracts in these
years.1 two neighborhoods.

--- Page 7 ---
2 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
Life Expectancy in Boston
Roxbury is not the only neighborhood progress, but we still have a long way to
by Census Tract
in Boston where life expectancy is go. The root causes of these disparities,
significantly lower than average. Life including structural racism, have resulted
A CENSUS TRACT
expectancy is also lower than Boston’s in residential segregation and chronic IN BACK BAY
Life Expectancy: 92 years
citywide average in census tracts in other disinvestment in communities where Medium Income $141,250
College Degree: 91%
neighborhoods such as in Dorchester, residents are disproportionately Black White: 82%
Black/African American: 1%
Mattapan, East Boston, and Jamaica and Latinx. Latinx: 8%
Plain.3
The adverse impacts this has had on
These neighborhoods differ in many economic opportunity and wealth
ways from that of Back Bay, including building are deeply entrenched in our city.
the presence of green spaces, housing To continue to make progress, we must
quality, and access to transportation. work together toward a shared vision for
The City of Boston and its partners have a healthier, more equitable Boston where
continued to address many of these social all residents have the opportunity to live
determinants of health. We have made long and well.
A CENSUS TRACT
IN ROXBURY
NUBIAN SQ.)
Life Expectancy:
69 years
Medium Income $41,211
College Degree: 44%
White: 13%
Black/African American: 50%
Latinx: 32%

--- Page 8 ---
3 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
LIVE LONG AND WELL GOAL
LIVE LONG AND WELL • Strategies to address the social and
structural factors that impact life We aim to close the life
Live Long and Well describes our vision
expectancy in Boston, ranging from
for a healthier, more equitable Boston. It expectancy gap entirely
affordable housing to access to health
offers community members, partners,
and social services. citywide by 2035.
funders, and other stakeholders an
• Our approach to supporting the
overview for Boston Public Health
We plan to do this by addressing the social and
physical and mental health of all
Commission’s (BPHC) ongoing efforts to
structural drivers of health and ensuring access
Bostonians across their lives, from birth
eliminate the life expectancy gap and
to health and social services for communities
to death.
reduce premature mortality throughout
most at risk for poor health outcomes.
Boston. Live Long and Well is a whole- • Spotlights on programs and
of-society approach, applying lessons initiatives that are advancing our Live • Lead with data
learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and Long and Well agenda.
• Share decision-making power with most
grounded in an anti-racism framework.
impacted communities
This report describes our focus areas as Life expectancy in Boston: Trends by • Establish partnerships and shared goals
we strive to mitigate persistent disparities Select Race and Ethnicity Group • Invest collaboratively
95
across Boston:
• Support place-based strategies to address
90 local needs
• The deep-rooted racism and social
determinants of health that underlie 85 • Promote accountability and sustainability
and drive the unacceptable racial and
80 • Focus on systems and policy change
ethnic health disparities in our city.
75
• The three leading causes of
70
premature mortality in Boston 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022
today, which are unintentional drug Latinx
White, Non-Hispanic
overdose, cancer, and cardiometabolic
Boston All Race/Ethnicities
disease. Black
DATA SOURCE: Boston resident deaths,
Massachusetts Department of Public Health
Learn more at the Live Long and Well website

--- Page 9 ---
4 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
BPHC’S MISSION based on race, ethnicity, income, age, gender, Applying an equitable community
religion, sexual orientation, and neighborhood. engagement approach. We incorporate
AND WORK
As this report describes in greater detail a racial equity lens in all our community
throughout, we do this by: engagement. Our Transformational
Community Engagement Plan emphasizes
Collaborating with City departments that
the need to intentionally seek and include
address social determinants of health.
the voices of those historically excluded, to
Many of our partners across City government
reduce barriers to participation, and to design
work every day to address factors — such as
engagement processes that work for and in
housing, food access, education, economic
these communities.
mobility, and the environment — that
profoundly impact health and well-being.
BPHC’s mission is to work in partnership
Through our Health Equity in All Policies OUR VALUES
with communities to protect and promote
initiative, we and our partners consider the
the health and well-being of all Boston BPHC has five core values that guide
impact of all our decisions on people of color
residents, especially those impacted by our work:
and others experiencing barriers to care.6
racism and systemic inequities.5 This mission
• Equity: Redistribute resources
statement was updated in 2023 after an all- Developing and advocating for policies equitably and challenge oppression
staff engagement process to ensure that it and regulations at the local, state, and • Transparency: Communicate
reflects our commitment to working with federal levels to improve health. From transparently and use data to inform
decisions
the community to advance health equity and advocating for maternal health and gun
• Anti-Racism: Commit to anti-racism
promote racial justice. violence prevention to serving on anti-poverty
as an action
commissions, we fight for policies that
Six BPHC bureaus and over 40 programs • Collaboration: Work together with
improve the health of Boston residents.
others
provide Boston residents with a wide array
of services, including accessible community- Providing direct health and social services • People-Centered: Put people at the
center of interactions
based health and social services; community to Boston residents. We continue to
engagement and advocacy; health-promoting improve the direct services that are critical to These values help shape our culture
policies and regulations; disease and injury residents’ health, including emergency medical and guide decisions, including strategic
planning, community investments, and
prevention; emergency services; health services, substance use treatment programs,
partnerships.
promotion; and health education services. and infectious disease management.
Through our policies, programs and services,
we strive to eliminate health disparities

--- Page 10 ---
HEALTH EQUITY
ACROSS BOSTON
To eliminate the life expectancy gap in our city, we must address the
social, institutional, systemic, and structural factors that affect physical
“
Growing up in Roxbury, I saw
and mental health. This includes the conditions and environments where
people are born, live, work, worship, play, and love. the product of racial division
and inequity in society and the
SOCIAL DETERMINANTS have documented the impact of social eventual health inequity that
and structural conditions on health
OF HEALTH comes from that. If you don’t
outcomes.9,10,11,12,13,14
have access to good food, good
Social conditions such as housing,
RACISM AND HEALTH
education, economic security, employment jobs, a good education, good
and the built environment are strong
Racism has had, and continues to have, environmental infrastructure,
predictors of health and well-being.
a significant impact on the overall health
what happens is you end up
Often referred to as “social determinants
and well-being of people of color. In
sick.”
of health” or “SDOH,” these factors
the U.S., centuries of discrimination,
account for the majority of an individual’s
racist policies, and barriers to accessing
MICHAEL CURRY, ESQ.
health outcomes.7,8 SDOH also influence
resources and opportunities have
PRESIDENT AND CEO
life expectancy and risk of developing resulted in significant inequities in Massachusetts League of Community Health Centers
a chronic disease, such as diabetes
health outcomes by race and ethnicity. A
or heart disease. Numerous studies
growing body of evidence has found that

--- Page 11 ---
6 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
all forms of racism, including structural, Studies have also demonstrated how
institutional and interpersonal racism, implicit and explicit bias, in addition Social Determinants
are associated with higher mortality and to other forms of institutional racism of Health
lower life expectancy among people of specifically within the healthcare system, The City of Boston is making investments
color compared to white individuals.15,16 influence access to care, quality of care, in Social Determinants of Health to improve
health and wellbeing.
Specifically, structural racism, defined and health outcomes among people of
as the totality of ways in which societies color.19,20 In addition, recent reviews have
foster racial inequity through systems provided evidence of negative health
that reinforce discriminatory beliefs impacts resulting from exposure to
and values, limits access to resources interpersonal racism and discrimination.21
essential for promoting health, such Education Health Care
A CITYWIDE AGENDA Access and Access and
as income, housing, education and Quality Quality
employment.17 Thus, structural racism is Health disparities across race, ethnicity,
a root cause of health inequities. and neighborhood are systemic, unfair,
and unjust.22 In recent years, the City
Racism may also directly impact health
of Boston has been intently focused on
outcomes through exposure to chronic, Social and
working to address these disparities. Economic Community
daily stress. The weathering hypothesis On July 12, 2020, Boston officially Security Context
has been proposed as a driver of racial
declared racism a public health crisis,
inequity in health outcomes, specifically
recognizing its serious impact on health Neighborhood
premature mortality, maternal morbidity and Built
and instructing all of City government Environment
and mortality and cardiovascular disease.
to work to dismantle systemic racism.23
This hypothesis states that the health
In 2021, the Health Inequities Task Force
status of Black adults deteriorates
laid out a series of recommendations
prematurely compared to other racial
through the Health Equity Now Plan
and ethnic groups as a consequence
to guide the City’s path toward health
of long-term exposure to social and
equity for all.24 In the years since, Boston
environmental stressors, such as chronic
has dedicated resources to diverse hiring
exposure to interpersonal, institutional
practices, affordable housing initiatives,
and structural racism, political
and economic opportunities for local
marginalization and economic adversity.18
and minority-owned businesses, among

--- Page 12 ---
7 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
many other efforts focused on equity and Together we are working to improve “
The most glaring differential
inclusion. In 2022, Boston established a conditions for all Bostonians by
in our city’s geographic
Task Force on Reparations, charged with advancing economic opportunity,
life expectancy data is
helping the Mayor and City of Boston making streets safer, and supporting
address racial inequities for descendants the development and preservation of socioeconomic status. The
of slavery. In the subsequent years, the affordable housing and a healthy physical
self-perpetuating nature of
City has begun investing in communities environment. Examples of this work
its roots is reflected across
based on the Task Force’s initial include:
multiple intersections of health
recommendations.25
• Creating and preserving
and wealth. If we intentionally
Across every cabinet and department, affordable housing and promoting
leverage our rich resources
the City is committed to addressing the equitable access to homeownership
social and systemic drivers of health opportunities.26 to close the gap and enable
and reaching the Live Long and Well thriving, the rest will fall in
• Combating climate change and
goal of eliminating the life expectancy
advancing resilience through an all- place.”
gap in Boston. Under Mayor Michelle
of-government approach.27
Wu’s administration, the City has
DR. THEA JAMES
made significant new investments and • Establishing a shared vision for a VICE PRESIDENT OF MISSION & ASSOCIATE CMO
Boston Medical Center Health System
commitments toward this goal, and will green, growing, and family-friendly
continue to do so. On many of these Boston that coordinates investment
initiatives, public health staff work closely in the built environment to actualize
with other City colleagues to share public that vision.28
health insight, provide data to inform
strategies, and add capacity.

--- Page 13 ---
COMMUNITY
COLLABORATION
Reducing deep-rooted disparities in health requires ongoing and
inclusive community engagement and collaboration. BPHC is COMMUNITY HEALTH
IMPROVEMENT PLAN
committed to creating, enhancing, and sustaining formal and informal
Based on our latest Community Health
partnerships with the people and communities we serve. It is only with
Needs Assessment and Improvement
our community and network of partners that we can reduce persistent
Planning process, the 2022-25 Community
inequities in life expectancy and premature mortality for a healthier, Health Improvement Plan identifies four
thriving Boston. priority areas to focus our collective efforts
toward a healthier, thriving city:
making power with those impacted by health
C OMMUNITY • Access to Services
inequities and those who are historically
ENGAGEMENT AND excluded from opportunities to create • Economic Mobility and Inclusion
EMPOWERMENT and sustain policy and practice decisions
• Housing
that affect their lives and communities.
BPHC is committed to the practice of • Mental and Behavioral Health
Transformational Community Engagement
Transformational Community Engagement,
results in policies not just for the people
which is essential to closing life expectancy
but by the people most affected.29 BPHC
gaps in our city. The BPHC community
uses our “We Asked, You Said, We Did, What
engagement standard of practice prioritizes
Changed” accountability structure to report
communities’ strengths, pride, and resources
back to communities and participants of
by collaborating and sharing decision-
all engagement initiatives on how their

--- Page 14 ---
9 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
involvement contributed to the final Boston a healthier city for all residents. BOSTON RESIDENTS IN THE 2024
decision and outcome of engagement. This The current improvement plan focuses COMMUNITY HEALTH NEEDS
ASSESSMENT SAID:
structure promotes trust building with on SDOH and root causes of health
communities. inequities.
BPHC’s work is guided by a model • The Community Action Network - a
“
for public health that recognizes the group of community residents and Everything has become so expensive, it
community as a full partner with deep organization representatives who feels unlivable at times. I make good money
work together and in collaboration and I still struggle with the cost of groceries
expertise in its own unique needs. This
or put off health care because of the cost.
with BPHC to reduce racial inequities
model focuses on transforming the work
Being able to access affordable food would
in infant mortality and poor birth
we do to empower community-based
make such a difference.”
outcomes, through policy and
organizations and residents.30
community-level changes.
This report is informed by several specific
• Nubian Square Task Force - a
community engagement activities, “
coalition of community-based, public My community needs healing from trauma
including but not limited to:.
health, and faith-based organizations, and substance use and the racism that we
• The Boston Community Health and businesses that share and experience on a day-to-day basis.”
Collaborative (BCHC) - a multi-sector coordinate resources in Roxbury’s
coalition, coordinated by BPHC, that Nubian Square neighborhood. They
work together to support people who
is working to improve the health of
“
It is time to start thinking and spending
use drugs and experience homelessness
Boston residents through a coordinated,
differently in order to maximize our results.
by meeting residents where they
citywide Community Health Needs There are a lot of young children that are
are and ensuring that resources are
Assessment. The Collaborative focuses suffering from mental health issues. We
tailored to their needs. There is a
efforts on key health priorities through need more community support services
similar coalition in East Boston. BPHC
a Community Health Improvement that can lend to targeted resources and
collaborates with the City’s Community
possibly collaborations.”
Plan.31 The Collaborative includes
Engagement Cabinet on this.
Boston hospitals, community
• The Cancer Advisory Group - a
health centers, community-based
group of community members and
organizations, and other community
cancer experts who provide advice to
members. The assessment and
inform BPHC’s cancer early detection
improvement plan inform public health
strategies to reduce racial inequities
planning and guide the work of making
in cancer mortality.

--- Page 15 ---
10 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
SPOTLIGHT
OUR COLLABORATORS Together in action
BPHC works with Boston residents, community
champions, health care entities, community-
based organizations (CBOs), and other partners
to improve health and well-being in Boston.
Within the City, we work closely with the
community health centers and hospitals that
serve our residents every day, and we invest in
and collaborate closely with CBOs across every
neighborhood.
We have strong statewide partnerships that
are critical to advancing this work. Among
them are our partners in state government, The City of Boston, BPHC, Atrius Health Equity Foundation (AHEF) & Boston
Community Health Collaborative (BCHC) Partnership is a new multi-sector partnership,
including the Massachusetts Executive Office
supported by a $10 million investment from AHEF, to fund community-based coalitions to
of Health and Human Services, the Department
create place-based opportunities for economic mobility and to increase generational wealth-
of Public Health, and the Bureau of Substance
building in communities and neighborhoods most impacted by and at risk for chronic disease.
Addiction Services.
This investment is a catalytic initial multi-sector partnership in support of the Live Long and
Well agenda.
The State’s Advancing Health Equity in
“ “
Massachusetts initiative, a place-based We are thrilled to partner with Through my work in the Mattapan
initiative aimed at eliminating racial, economic, the Mayor, the City of Boston, the community, we have heard again and
Boston Public Health Commission, again that we need to address the many
and regional disparities in health, is a partner
and the Boston Community Health inequities that impact our health, like
agenda of Live Long and Well. The Health
Collaborative, all of whom have racial discrimination, low wages, limited
Equity Compact, a group of leaders of color shown tremendous leadership in access to housing, the need for quality
in Massachusetts, is another key statewide advancing community priorities for education, and much more. We must
partner in this work, advancing health equity better health.” address all of these issues by working
in partnership with community.
across the state by transforming policy and
DR. ANN HWANG Collectively, we can do this!”
institutional change.
PRESIDENT
Atrius Health Equity Foundation VIVIEN MORRIS
Mattapan resident and part of the Boston
Community Health Collaborative

--- Page 16 ---
LEADING CAUSES OF
PREMATURE MORTALITY
Boston’s average life expectancy is high for These conditions have a disproportionate effect on
the U.S. and many of our residents live long, the lives of Bostonians of color and residents of our
poorer neighborhoods. Between 2020 and 2023,
healthy lives. But health, a basic human
the gap in average life expectancy between Black
right, is not equitably distributed in our city.
and White residents of Boston was 6.5 years. 40%
Far too many people die far too young from
of the difference in average life expectancy was due
conditions that can and should be prevented.
to younger Black residents dying before the age of
40. The leading causes of death that contributed the
The three leading causes of premature mortality
most to the gap in life expectancy between Black and
(death before the age of 65) and reduced life
White residents were the same as those contributing
expectancy (expected years of life at birth) in Boston
to premature mortality and reduced life expectancy
today are:32
overall in the city: unintentional overdose, cancer, and
• Unintentional drug overdose heart disease.33
• Cancer, including these preventable cancers:
BPHC is working to reduce the gaps we see in
breast, cervical, colorectal, lung, and prostate
premature mortality and life expectancy from
cancers
these conditions through a range of strategies and
• Cardiometabolic disease, including heart disease, specific partnerships and initiatives, examples of
stroke, and diabetes which we spotlight in the rest of this report. In

--- Page 17 ---
12 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
Leading Causes of Premature Mortality
addition to strategies targeting specific health
Count under age 65
outcomes, we are also committed to strategies
that impact all causes of premature mortality,
RANK 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
such as enhancing the capacity of community
Cancer Unintended Unintended Unintended Unintended
health workers to provide outreach and health 1 overdose overdose overdose overdose
222
education in the diverse communities of Boston, 252 265 254 281
and investing in community initiatives based
Unintended Cancer Cancer Cancer Cancer
2 overdose
out of CBOs or health centers to holistically 233 233 224 223
191
address health and social service needs. In
Diseases of Diseases of Diseases of Diseases of Diseases of
December 2023, we established the Community 3 the heart the heart the heart the heart the heart
Health Equity Empowerment (CHEE) Fund and 179 190 189 161 159
partnered with Mass General Brigham to provide Accidents COVID-19 COVID-19 COVID-19 Accidents
4
awards of up to $200,000 to ten organizations 39 122 70 44 47
working to increase access to healthcare in
Chronic liver Diabetes Diabetes Diabetes Diabetes
underserved neighborhoods.34 disease & mellitis, mellitis mellitis mellitis
5
cirrhosis Homicide
56 42 38
38 52, 52
NOTE: Rank is based on number of deaths.
DATA SOURCE: Boston resident deaths, Massachusetts Department of Public Health

--- Page 18 ---
13 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
DRUG OVERDOSE
Unintentional drug overdose is the leading treatment as white residents.36 instrumental in this work. Recent
cause of premature death in Boston. Massachusetts opioid settlement funds
Substance use disorder (SUD), combined Opioid overdoses are concentrated in supplement the response. Early data
with an unpredictable drug supply neighborhoods with higher rates of from 2024 suggests that the trend in fatal
(frequent contamination with more potent unemployment, lower education, and overdoses may be reversing.40 At this
drugs), has led to fatal overdoses involving lower household income.37 And there pivotal moment, we must strengthen our
substances such as fentanyl, prescription are stark racial and ethnic differences commitment to evidence-based public
opioids, cocaine, alcohol, benzodiazepines, in the treatment and support provided health.
amphetamines, heroin, and xylazine. to individuals following an overdose
Between 2019 and 2023, fatal drug overdoses hospitalization. One study found that in
increased by over 40% in Boston, with Boston, when Black and Latinx people
the heaviest toll among Black and Latinx were hospitalized for opioid overdose, they
residents.35 were 49% and 31% less likely to receive
Drug Mortality Rate by Race/Ethnicity
follow-up substance use treatment than and Year, 2019-2023
In 2023, the opioid overdose white residents.38 Without post-overdose Deaths per 100,000 residents
mortality rate for Black residents
treatment and care, individuals are more
was 131% higher than the rate for
likely to die from a future overdose. 120
white residents. The rate for Latinx
100
residents was 48% higher than the
rate for white residents. Given the scope of the opioid epidemic 80
60
and the tragic toll it takes in certain
Many factors contribute to a person’s risk 40
communities, the City of Boston and BPHC
20
for substance use and overdose. Structural
have committed extensive resources to
0
racism, adverse childhood experiences,
addressing it. This includes dedicated 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
poverty, trauma, incarceration, mental
outreach, resources, harm reduction Latinx
illness, and homelessness are key risk White, Non-Hispanic
methods, residential treatment programs,
Boston All Race/Ethnicities
factors. In addition, Bostonians of color,
and more.39 In addition to significant Black
particularly in poorer Black, Latinx, and Asian
allocation of City funds, federal grants
indigenous communities, do not have DATA SOURCE: Boston resident deaths, Massachusetts
and support from the State’s Bureau
Department of Public Health
the same access to preventive care and
of Substance Addiction Services are

--- Page 19 ---
14 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
DRUG OVERDOSE • Ensure opportunities for housing. SPOTLIGHT
OUR STRATEGIES Low-threshold shelter has a stabilizing Together in action
effect, providing people with a safe place
To reduce premature mortality from
To reduce drug overdoses in Boston, we
to sleep, storage for their belongings,
drug overdoses across the City, BPHC is
are leading several strategic programs.
ability to come and go, access to clinical
committed to furthering its efforts to:
and social services, regular meals, and
Naloxone Access and Education
• Connect individuals to treatment.
housing navigation services.42 Being
programs distribute naloxone and
When people know how and where to
unhoused can put people at greater risk
train people who use drugs, service
get help for SUD or overdose, they are
of fatal overdose. One study on people
providers, and family members on
more likely to seek treatment and care.
experiencing homelessness in Boston
how to recognize an overdose and
By delivering information and direct
found that drug overdose accounted for
administer naloxone. Through a
care services, BPHC is working to ensure
one in four deaths among this population
new CDC-funded initiative (Boston
that anyone seeking treatment for SUD
from 2003-2018.43 In close collaboration
Overdose Data 2 Action) and opioid
or overdose can get the care they need.
with the Mayor’s Office of Housing, BPHC
settlement-funded community grants,
We work closely with the State as well as
is providing housing options and resources
naloxone distribution and overdose
community health centers and hospitals to
for individuals experiencing SUD.
reversal training are being expanded
coordinate care and refer people to drug
• Increase youth awareness and throughout Boston.
treatment programs.
engagement. Looking ahead to the future
• Expand harm reduction. Harm
generation, we must prevent substance In 2024, BPHC distributed 23,101
reduction strategies like increasing use disorder before it happens. We are naloxone doses and trained 3,010
access to naloxone (which reverses opioid individuals across 203 trainings.
working in partnership with young people
overdoses), drug checking and fentanyl
to empower them and provide educational
test strips, clean syringes and other drug
material and messages to youth and their BPHC is also expanding our data
use supplies save lives. BPHC will continue
families about substance use and social- collection efforts to better track drug-
to expand and explore innovative access to
emotional learning. We support youth related deaths among our residents
evidence-based harm reduction services,
in becoming health leaders within their and to evaluate this and other
showing up with compassion and building
own communities, and we coordinate interventions.
trust with people who use drugs.41
prevention efforts between public, private,
and nonprofit sectors.

--- Page 20 ---
15 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
Heart Disease Mortality Rate
by Race/Ethnicity, 2019-2023
Deaths per 100,000 residents
CARDIOMETABOLIC DISEASE
150
Cardiometabolic risk factors are a group with limited open spaces, inadequate
of conditions that often occur together, grocery stores, and unacceptable levels of 100
including diabetes, pre-diabetes, hypertension environmental pollutants. These factors
and obesity, and are a major cause of heart create barriers to physical activity and 50
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
disease. Heart disease includes conditions healthy eating, which affect risk of heart
Diabetes Mortality Rate
such as coronary artery disease, heart failure, disease, stroke, and diabetes.44 Barriers
by Race/Ethnicity, 2019-2023
and arrhythmias. Type 2 Diabetes is the to accessing healthcare services which is Deaths per 100,000 residents
most common type of diabetes, accounts critical to prevention and treatment are an 50
for approximately 90% of all cases, and is a ongoing challenge for our city’s historically 40
leading cause of cardiovascular morbidity and marginalized communities.
30
mortality. The prevalence of type 2 diabetes
Hypertension is a major risk factor for
20
has increased significantly, largely due to
heart disease and stroke. In addition to
10
escalating rates of obesity among adults
heart disease and stroke, untreated or
and children. These conditions affect all 0
sub-optimally controlled hypertension 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Bostonians, but people of color and residents
can lead to a range of disabling and deadly Latinx
of lower-income neighborhoods in Boston are White, Non-Hispanic
chronic illnesses including kidney disease,
Boston All Race/Ethnicities
disproportionately impacted.
vision loss, and sexual dysfunction. Black Black
Asian
adults are disproportionately affected
Compared to white Bostonians, Black and have the highest rate of hypertension DATA SOURCE: Boston resident deaths,
Massachusetts Department of Public Health
Bostonians are three times more likely
in Boston. Chronic exposure to racism,
to die from diabetes. Latinx Bostonians
weathering and allostatic load, which
are nearly twice as likely compared to
among children is a growing concern,
white Bostonians. refers to the accumulations of physiologic
particularly among children of color. Recent
changes due to chronic stressors in daily
studies have noted an increase in pediatric
There are many reasons for the life, has been associated with development
hypertension largely due to the obesity
glaring disparities in early death from of hypertension.45 In our analysis, higher
epidemic.47
cardiometabolic conditions. Structural rates of hypertension were observed among
and institutional racism, and related social adult Bostonians with less education or In partnership with several City departments,
determinants of health, play a significant lower household income, or who were the State, external funders, and community-
role. Boston’s past history of discriminatory unemployed, older, or living in publicly based partners, we are investing further into
housing policies has led to neighborhoods supported housing.46 Of note, hypertension this long-standing driver of early death.

--- Page 21 ---
16 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
CARDIOMETABOLIC DISEASE between nutrition and cardiometabolic SPOTLIGHT
OUR STRATEGIES health. BPHC collaborates with several Together in action
community-based and neighborhood
To reduce disparities in cardiometabolic
To implement our strategies around cardiometabolic
organizations, the Mayor’s Offices of
health outcomes, BPHC is working to: health, BPHC leads these and other collaborations
Food Justice and Early Childhood, and
and programs:
• Create economic mobility
Boston Public Schools.
opportunities for individuals at risk.
Boston REACH is a partnership with the City’s
• Improve access to safe spaces for
Wealth and health are closely linked. To
Office of Food Justice, Streets Cabinet, Office of
active living. Safe, public spaces
reduce the burden of cardiometabolic
Early Childhood, and community partners in East
enable adults and children to be
diseases in Boston, BPHC works to
Boston and Mattapan. With funding from the Centers
physically active as part of their
enhance economic opportunities and
for Disease Control and Prevention’s Racial and
everyday lives. BPHC collaborates
mobility for all residents, including
Ethnic Approaches to Community Health Grant,
with the Boston Parks Department to
through our new partnership with
Boston REACH increases access to fresh, healthy
ensure that our parks are welcoming to
Atrius Health Equity Foundation
food in Boston’s food pantries; affordable fruits and
everyone as places to engage in healthy
and Boston Community Health
vegetables at Boston farmers markets; safer streets
activity. We also work with the Boston’s
Collaborative mentioned on page 10
for walking, biking, and taking transit; and quality
Streets Cabinet and other partners to
of this report. We focus on supporting
healthy childcare programs that prioritize nutrition
make streets safer and more accessible
those who have historically been
and physical activity for children ages 0 to 5.
for active living.
denied opportunities to build wealth
and maintain health. • Expand disease screening and
management. For many people
• Improve access to nutritious,
with heart disease and diabetes, early
affordable, culturally relevant
detection and ongoing management
food. Access to healthy, affordable,
with a health care team is the
unprocessed or minimally processed
difference between life and death. But
food is essential for cardiometabolic
many residents have limited access
health as it is important for preventing
to medical screenings and services.
obesity and hypertension and reducing
BPHC collaborates with community
cholesterol. We are working to make
health centers, hospitals, insurers,
nutritious and culturally relevant food
and CBOs to improve access as well as
accessible for all residents through
public awareness of these life-saving
improved policies, expanded resources,
resources.
and greater public awareness of the link

--- Page 22 ---
17 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
PREVENTABLE CANCER
Cancer is one of the leading causes of physical environments based on race, All Invasive Cancer Premature Mortality by
Sex and Race/Ethnicity, 2019-2023 Combined
death in Boston, despite the fact that ethnicity, and income. These differences
Age-adjusted rates per 100,000 residents under age 65
many cancers can be prevented or exist because of the long legacy of
60.3
treated when detected early. discrimination, disinvestment, and 60
exploitation. They are linked to systems, 53.6
Preventable cancers — including breast,
policies, and practices such as redlining 50
cervical, colorectal, lung, and prostate 42.6
and predatory lending.
— affect many Bostonians. But there 40
35.9 37.3 36.8
are significant differences in rates and Cancer screening, such as mammograms
31.7
premature mortality from cancer based and colonoscopies, can lead to early 30 28.8
on race and ethnicity.48 For instance, the detection and life-saving treatment. But
18.7 18.7
rate of colon cancer is highest among cancer screening rates are also informed 20
Black Bostonians. by a range of determinants of health,
10
including health insurance, employment
Black men in Boston are 50% more status, and access to childcare.50
likely to die from colon cancer than Boston Asian Black Latinx White Boston Asian Black Latinx White
white men. Obtaining cancer screening can be
FEMALE MALE
challenging for any number of reasons,
DATA SOURCE: Boston resident deaths, Massachusetts
Social determinants of health, including
but the barriers are greater for Department of Public Health
employment, income, and housing, play
Bostonians who, for instance, cannot take
an important role in cancer mortality.
time off from work or lack the childcare
The physical environment in which
or transportation they need to get to an
people live or work can raise cancer
appointment. Without routine screenings,
risk substantially. Exposure to indoor
early detection and treatment, which
and outdoor air pollution, for example,
should be accessible to all Bostonians,
increases risk of various lung conditions, these cancers will continue to contribute
including lung cancer.49
to premature mortality and lower life
expectancy.51
There are stark differences in the
opportunities to live or work in healthy

--- Page 23 ---
18 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
PREVENTABLE CANCER programmatic tool at our disposal to SPOTLIGHT
OUR STRATEGIES decrease tobacco use and reduce the Together in action
disproportionate burden of tobacco-
To improve cancer outcomes for all
related disease. To promote our cancer-reduction strategies,
Bostonians, the BPHC is working to:
BPHC leads this and other initiatives:
• Increase community education
• Reduce environmental exposures. and awareness. The information and
Colorectal Cancer Campaign is a partnership
The air we breathe, the water we messaging people receive can make a
between BPHC and the Colon Cancer Coalition
drink, the food we eat, and the difference in their health behaviors.
to help save lives from colon cancer. Because
materials we use to do our jobs can BPHC aims to normalize and promote
colon cancer screening can help catch cancer
all impact cancer risk. BPHC seeks to early detection behaviors, like
early when it is most treatable, BPHC and the
reduce exposures to cancer-causing cancer screening tests, especially
Coalition launched a multilingual campaign in
agents in the city through regulatory in high-risk populations where
enforcement and collaboration with screening earlier would save lives. 2024 to encourage early screening, especially in
the Boston Inspectional Services and BPHC works with community-based Black and Latinx communities.
Environment Departments. organizations to develop messaging
It’s our human right to access healthcare
and interventions to shift behaviors.
• Reduce tobacco and nicotine that’s impactful to us. Screen for colorectal
cancer early on, so you have the best
use and exposure. We will • Ensure access to screening. pathway available for a healthy life.
-Brenda Lormil-Raymond
continue to protect Bostonians When people have easier access to Nurse Practitioner
through enforcement of nation- cancer screenings, they are more
leading regulations that prevent likely to get screened. BPHC works
environmental tobacco and nicotine to make screening more accessible,
exposure in workplaces and prevent convenient, and affordable through
Don’t Wait Until It’s Too Late. Get your screening today.
youth initiation by prohibiting the community health centers and other
sale of tobacco and vaping products community-based locations as well For more information on screening, visit: boston.gov/cancer
to residents under 21 and restricting as through insurance coverage. BPHC
the sale of products that target youth also encourages healthcare providers
healthcare providers, especially in their own
of color, including menthol products, to use guideline recommended
communities. BPHC seeks to improve access
blunt wraps, and inexpensive screening tests for early detection.
to cancer treatment for residents who are
cigars. We also work to empower
• Provide more connections to
diagnosed with cancer through increased
residents to quit smoking. Our
care. People are more likely to get
collaboration with the community health
work continues as we explore every
treatment for cancer when they
centers and local hospitals, including Dana
policy, system, environmental, and
are supported and encouraged by
Farber Cancer Institute.

--- Page 24 ---
LIVING WELL
AT EVERY AGE
SPOTLIGHT
In addition to addressing the leading causes of premature mortality,
Together in action
BPHC is promoting the physical and mental health of all Boston
residents at every stage of life. We are focused on eliminating To promote mental health across Boston’s
diverse residents, BPHC is engaged in targeted
persistent health disparities that span all ages, often starting early
initiatives, including:
— sometimes even before birth — and lasting through old age. From
Workforce Pathway Investments are
preterm birth to age-related dementia, there are significant disparities
collaborations with UMass Boston and
based on race, ethnicity, income, education, and neighborhood. BPHC
Franciscan Children’s Hospital as well as Boston
is working to eliminate these gaps and help all Bostonians thrive at
Public Schools. The goal is to prepare diverse,
every stage of life.
youth-facing mental health practitioners to
serve Boston communities through training and
fieldwork in Boston schools, Boston Centers for
Youth and Families, and other settings. Over
five years, this work will support more than 600
people pursuing behavioral health careers in
Boston.

--- Page 25 ---
20 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
MENTAL HEALTH connection between mental health, ACEs, SPOTLIGHT
Together in action
and substance use disorder.56
From our youngest residents to our oldest,
(continued)
living long and well includes both physical Additional social and economic factors
and mental well-being. Much as there are — such as prolonged exposure to racism,
Early Childhood Mental Health
persistent health disparities in Boston discrimination, oppression, stigma, or
Programming is a collaboration with the
when it comes to common physical health exclusion — can lead to sustained stress,
Children’s Services of Roxbury and the
conditions, there are similar gaps in mental further affecting mental and physical health
Department of Children and Families to
health outcomes. outcomes.57
support children under four years old who
are connected to the state child welfare
Most physical health conditions, including Young people of color have higher rates
system or BPHC family support services
the leading causes of premature mortality, of attempted suicide than white youth.
and in need of early social and emotional
are intimately linked to mental health. For LGBTQ+ youth, another population facing
development. Over four years, the initiative
instance, anxiety, depression, and adverse historic discrimination and exclusion, also
will train at least 37 family partners, nurses,
childhood events (ACEs) can increase the risk experience higher rates of suicide, suicidal
social workers, and case workers; provide
of diabetes, heart attack, stroke, and cancer. ideation, and self-harm than non-LGBTQ+
services for 275 children; screen 1,800
52,53,54 Depression following a stroke is a youth.58,59
families for social and emotional wellness;
common phenomenon.55 There is also a close
provide more behavioral health services;
Fewer Black and Latinx youth in Boston
and increase awareness of early childhood
Any Mental Health Visits* Among report feeling connected to someone
Ages 0-18, 2021 at school and report having emotional mental health.
Age-specific rates per 10,000 residents support than white youth.
300
252.2*
250 To support Bostonians of all ages — across of Youth Engagement & Advancement, local
200 169.4 166.9* race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender hospitals and community health centers,
identity, and more — BPHC relies on many and community-based organizations (CBOs).
150
109.0
invaluable partners. Through BPHC’s Boston EMS is also changing the way it
100 75.3*
Center for Behavioral Health and Wellbeing, responds to behavioral health crises to
50
the Child, Adolescent, and Family Health provide non-ambulance response to low-
Boston Asian Black Latinx White Bureau, and the Office of Violence acuity calls, and we are developing other
NOTE: * Denotes significant differences between
Prevention, we collaborate extensively with community-based response efforts to mental
racial or ethnic group and White residents.
Boston Public Schools, the Mayor’s Office health crises.
DATA SOURCE: Acute Hospital Case Mix Database,
Massachusetts Center for Health Information and Analysis.

--- Page 26 ---
21 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
Mental and behavioral health have become an
urgent issue for Boston residents, especially
for youth of color and LGBTQ+ youth. In
response, Mayor Wu asked BPHC to take bold
actionable steps to address the worsening
youth mental health crisis in Boston,
dedicating approximately $12 million from
the federal American Rescue Plan toward the
effort. In 2022, BPHC established the Center
for Behavioral Health and Wellness to provide
an evidence-based, effective, and meaningful
response.
MENTAL HEALTH
OUR STRATEGIES • Promote diversity in the mental marginalized youth, particularly youth
health workforce. People of color are of color and/or LGBTQ+ individuals,
To address health disparities in mental and
more likely to have a positive health care who face significant behavioral health
behavioral health throughout Boston, BPHC
experience with a provider of the same disparities.
is working to:
race or ethnicity.60 BPHC aims to recruit,
• Expand education and awareness.
• Prioritize support for our youth. expand, and train a more diverse,
Mental health is still highly stigmatized
Support early in life — from early culturally competent, trauma-informed
in many Boston communities. We
childhood through adolescence — has behavioral health workforce that fully
are engaging in evidence-based
a critical impact on long-term mental represents and reflects the diversity of
communication strategies to reduce
health. BPHC continues to expand Boston communities.
stigma by increasing awareness,
programming that promotes youth mental
• Strengthen local organizational education, and dialog around mental
health. We work closely with essential
capacity and resources. To health and wellness with a focus on
partners, including the Boston Public
complement Boston’s world-class mental Boston’s Black, Latinx, LGBTQ+, and
Schools, the Mayor’s Office of Youth
health care facilities, it is critical that otherwise historically marginalized
Engagement and Advancement, and the
people have access to resources within youth, as these are the youth bearing the
Mayor’s Office of Early Childhood.
their own communities. We aim to greatest impact of today’s youth mental
build the capacity of local CBOs serving health crisis.

--- Page 27 ---
22 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
INFANT AND MATERNAL HEALTH
Stark racial and ethnic health inequities within the health care system contribute Infant Mortality by Maternal
Race/Ethnicity, 2017-2021
exist in infant mortality and maternal significantly to poor health outcomes
Deaths per 100,000 residents
12
morbidity and mortality in Boston.61 among birthing people and children.63
Infant mortality rates, birth weight, and 10
Several studies highlight the role of non-
gestational age serve as key markers for
socioeconomic factors on maternal and 8
measuring the well-being of pregnant
infant outcomes. One study noted that Black
birthing people and their infants. 6
infants and mothers in all income brackets
4
have higher morbidity and mortality than
Black infants in Boston experience
their white counterparts. In this study the 2
approximately twice the rate of
preterm birth and low birthweight, mortality rate, low birthweight and preterm
0
and approximately three times the
birth rates for infants of Black women in the 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
rate of death compared with white
highest income bracket were significantly
infants. Latinx
higher compared to white women in the White, Non-Hispanic
In Massachusetts, Black women Boston All Race/Ethnicities
lowest income bracket.64 Black
are nearly twice as likely to die
during pregnancy or within one year DATA SOURCE: Boston resident deaths, Massachusetts
These findings suggest that higher
postpartum than white women.62 Department of Public Health
socioeconomic status is not protective
against the impact of racism among Black
Research shows that individual behaviors
pregnant birthing individuals. Indeed, racism
— such as what a pregnant person
leads to chronic stress and weathering,
smokes or drinks alcohol — do not
undermines the health of mothers and
explain these racial disparities. The
their infants, irrespective of their economic
root causes of these inequities include
status.65 Institutional racism (i.e. racism
community-level social determinants
experienced within the healthcare system)
of health such as substandard housing
also creates barriers to accessing care and
and limited access to high quality
leads to the provision of lower quality care.
nutrition in their neighborhood grocery
stores and markets. Furthermore,
racism, discrimination, and implicit
bias experienced throughout life and

--- Page 28 ---
23 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
INFANT AND MATERNAL HEALTH children, such as lack of paid paternal SPOTLIGHT
OUR STRATEGIES leave, custody challenges, and carceral Together in action
involvement. BPHC partners with
At BPHC we work to protect the lives
To reduce disparities in infant and maternal
the National Association of City and
and health of mothers and infants by
health, BPHC engages in several targeted
County Health Officials (NACCHO) and
promoting the support systems they need
initiatives to support families, including:
the National Fatherhood Initiative to
to not only survive but thrive. We aim to:
develop strategies to support fathers
Fetal and Infant Mortality Review (FIMR) is
• Enhance perinatal systems of care. and other caregivers.
a community-based, action-oriented process
The perinatal period is a particularly
• Mobilize communities to promote to review fetal and infant deaths annually and
critical time for families. To support
maternal and child health. use the findings to guide policies and programs
them during this stage, BPHC developed
Boston families suffer from systems to advance maternal and child health equity.
a new community-based doula program
and structures that create inequities BPHC’s FIMR arose through the advocacy and
that connects families to doula support,
in birth outcomes. BPHC partners energy of the Community Action Network
trains community members as doulas,
with community advocates to advance (CAN) through the Boston Healthy Start
and educates providers and residents on
systems-level policies to advance Initiative. The CAN is a coalition of parents,
doula services.
maternal and child health, and is providers, and advocates working together to
• Empower parenting families. currently developing a Fetal and Infant reduce racial inequities in infant mortality and
Parenting families deserve access to Mortality Review (FIMR) program. poor birth outcomes.
culturally and linguistically appropriate
Boston Community Perinatal Health
services but often experience barriers
Project is a new community-based doula
to accessing them. BPHC is expanding
program. Doulas provide guidance and support
our home visiting programs and
to a pregnant woman during labor. The project
partnering with families to connect
connects families to doula support, trains
them to critical health resources,
community members as doulas, and educates
education, and services.
providers and residents on doula services.
• Engage fathers and other caregivers.
Children benefit from actively engaged
parents, yet fathers continue to
experience structural barriers to
connection and involvement with their

--- Page 29 ---
24 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
HEALTHY AGING
BPHC is committed to ensuring that our Research shows that social determinants of Hospitalization and Mortality Rates
for Alzheimer’s/Dementia
older adult population has the resources health also play a role in cognition. Lower
they need to sustain quality of life as they socioeconomic status, lower education Age-adjusted Hospitalization rate, 2020
(per 10,000)
age. levels, employment in manual labor, early- Age-adjusted Mortality rate, 2018 – 2021
(per 100,000)
and late-life food insecurity, early-life
BPHC launched its first-ever Healthy Aging
adversity, higher levels of stress, social
109.5
Program in 2024, building on work begun in
isolation, and racial discrimination all
2021 to support residents with Alzheimer’s
increase dementia risk. 69.2
disease and related dementias (ADRD). The 57.5
Massachusetts Health Aging Collaborative By working closely with Boston’s Age 32.0
22.7 23.2 17.3
estimates that about 16% of Bostonians Strong Commission, the City’s department 5.5
age 65 and up, or about 13,000 residents, supporting Bostonians 55 and older, we Black Latinx White Asian
currently have a dementia diagnosis, and aim to address dementia’s modifiable risk
DATA SOURCE: Acute Hospital Case Mix Database,
the total number of Boston residents living factors and the social determinants of Massachusetts Center for Health Information and
Analysis and Boston resident deaths, Massachusetts
with ADRD is expected to increase.66 brain health holistically through strong
Department of Public Health
partnerships, effective public education,
Studies show strong links between
data-driven programming, and prioritizing
dementia and cardiometabolic diseases
input from older adults.
like hypertension, diabetes, and obesity,
which not only drive premature mortality
Over the next 40 years, dementia
but also put Black and Latinx Bostonians
is projected to disproportionately
over age 65 at disproportionate risk
impact Black and Latinx residents,
of developing dementia compared to
rising 70% among whites, 100%
white residents. Other known modifiable among Blacks, and 400% among
risk factors include excessive alcohol Latinx Bostonians.
consumption, smoking, physical inactivity,
and depression, some of which are also
higher among Boston’s Black and Latinx
residents.67

--- Page 30 ---
25 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
HEALTHY AGING • Create new opportunities for SPOTLIGHT
OUR STRATEGIES community engagement. Together in action
With age, people often feel less
Promoting brain health and reducing
To promote healthy aging for all Bostonians, BPHC
involved and less empowered in
dementia risk are key parts of healthy
engages in these and other strategic initiatives:
their lives and communities, which
aging. We are building an environment
can undermine cognitive, mental,
where Boston’s older adults can live long BPHC launched the Boston Building Our
and physical health. BPHC strives to
and well. Working alongside Boston’s Age Largest Dementia (BOLD) Infrastructure
engage communities around healthy
Strong Commission, we aim to: Project with funding from the CDC’s Healthy
aging, and find opportunities to meet
Brain Initiative. BOLD aims to build systems and
• Promote infrastructure for aging. older residents where they are — in
support policy changes for people living with
As people age, their needs shift, homes and in the community.
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias. Using
and they sometimes go unnoticed
• Capture relevant data regarding insights from our stakeholder coalitions and
and unmet, especially in under-
older adults. Data helps ensure community needs assessments, BPHC created
resourced communities. At BPHC we
that we’re addressing real needs a strategic plan to promote dementia risk
are committed to supporting City
with effective solutions. We are reduction, access to screening and diagnosis,
infrastructure to promote healthy
expanding our data infrastructure and supports for dementia caregivers.
aging, working in partnership with
to measure healthy aging and to
the Age Strong Commission and
inform the development of strategic
other City agencies to make sure
programming at BPHC in partnership
older adults have continued access to
with the Age Strong Commission and
critical services, programs, and social
other City departments.
connections.
• Expand support for Alzheimer
Disease and Related Dementias
(ADRD). We aim to reduce the impact
of ADRD among our older residents
through implementation of a new
strategic plan to meet the needs of
residents living with — or at high risk
of — ADRD. 68

--- Page 31 ---
JOIN US!
To reach our goal of eliminating the life expectancy gap in Boston Interested in how you can
by 2035, BPHC is proud to work alongside many invaluable partners,
support this work?
including other government agencies, community-based organizations,
the health care sector, and private funders. Whether you are an external funder
interested in supporting the City
Closing the life expectancy gap and reducing premature mortality
on this work or a local organization
requires continued and deepened collaboration, investment, and
seeking to partner on our Live Long
commitment across sectors.
and Well goals, please reach out to us
We invite organizations and individuals who share our vision for Boston at info@bphc.org with your name and
to join us in this work. Together — and only together — we can make your interest, and we’ll be in touch.
Boston a place where all residents Live Long and Well.

--- Page 32 ---
27 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
ENDNOTES
Methodology: Data for this report are primarily sourced 7 Braveman P, Gottlieb L. The social determinants 18 Thorpe RJ Jr, Fesahazion RG, Parker L, Wilder T,
from the Health of Boston (2023, 2024) reports. For of health: it’s time to consider the causes Rooks RN, Bowie JV, Bell CN, Szanton SL, LaVeist TA.
details on the data sources and methodology employed of the causes. Public Health Rep. 2014 Accelerated Health Declines among African Americans
in the analysis please refer to these reports available at Jan-Feb;129 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):19-3. in the USA. J Urban Health. 2016 Oct;93(5):808-819.
boston.gov/bphc-data. We have updated some of our
8 Hood CM, Gennuso KP, Swain GR, Catlin BB. 19 Hall WJ, Chapman MV, Lee KM, et al. Implicit racial/
analysis to include data from 2022 and 2023. Please be
County Health Rankings: Relationship Between ethnic bias among health care professionals and its
advised that 2022-2023 data are preliminary and subject
Determinant Factors and Health Outcomes. influence on health care outcomes: a systemic review.
to change. Raw preliminary data may be incomplete or
Am J Prev Med 2016;50(2):129-135. American journal of public health. 2015;105(12):e60-e76.
inaccurate, have not been fully verified, and revisions
are likely to occur following the production of these 9 Krieger J, Higgins DL. Housing and health: Time 20 Saluja B, Bryant Z. How implicit bias contributes
data. The Massachusetts Department of Public Health again for public health action. Am J Public Health. to racial disparities in maternal morbidity
strongly cautions users regarding the accuracy of 2002;92:758–68. doi: 10.2105/ajph.92.5.758. and mortality in the United States. Journal
statistical analyses based on preliminary data and 10 Phelan JC, Link BG, Tehranifar P. Social conditions of women’s health. 2021;30(2): 270-3.
particularly with regard to small numbers of events. as fundamental causes of health inequalities: theory, 21 Williams DR, Lawrence JA, Davis BA. Racism and
evidence, and policy implications. Journal of Health Health: Evidence and Needed Research. Annu
and Social Behavior. 2010;51 Suppl:S28S40. Rev Public Health. 2019 Apr 1;40:105-125.
1 BPHC. Health of Boston, 2023 Provisional Mortality and 11 Macintyre S, Ellaway A, Cummins S. Place 22 BPHC. BPHC Mission [01/07/25].
Life Expectancy Report [2023]. Available from: https:// effects on health: how can we conceptualise, Available from: https://www.boston.gov/
www.boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2023/05/ operationalise and measure them? Social government/cabinets/boston-public-health-
HOB_Mortality_LE_2023_FINAL_May12.pdf Science Medicine. 2002;55(1):125-139. commission/about-health-commission
2 Zimmerman E, Evans BF, Woolf SH, Haley, AD. 12 Marmot, M. G., and M. J. Shipley. “G, Rose. 23 City of Boston, Office of the Mayor (Martin J.
Social capital and health outcomes in Boston. 1984. Inequalities in death-specific explanation Walsh). An Executive Order Declaring Racism an
Richmond, VA: Center on Human Needs, of a general pattern.” Lancet: 1003-1006. Emergency and Public Health Crisis in the City of
Virginia Commonwealth University, 2012 Boston. [06/12/20]. Available from: https://www.
13 Gregory, C. A., & Coleman-Jensen, A. (n.d.). Food
3 Ojikutu, Bisola (2024, Oct. 27 - 30). Moving from insecurity, chronic disease, and health among boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2020/06/
Data to Action: Local Public Health Response working-age adults. Available from: http://www.ers. racism-as-public-health-crisis-ocr.pdf
to Life Expectancy Gaps in the US. [Conference usda.gov/publications/pub-details/?pubid=84466 24 BPHC. Health Equity Now Plan [2021]. Available
session]. APHA Annual Meeting and Expo, from: https://www.boston.gov/sites/default/files/
2024, Minneapolis, MN, United States. 14 Whitaker RC, Phillips SM, Orzol SM. Food insecurity file/2021/07/Health%20Equity%20Now%20Plan.pdf
and the risks of depression and anxiety in mothers
4 U.S. Census Bureau. QuickFacts: Boston city, and behavior problems in their preschool-aged 25 City of Boston. Task Force on Reparations [01/13/25].
Massachusetts (Accessed 01/20/25). Available children. Pediatrics. 2006 Sep;118(3):e859-68. Available from: https://www.boston.gov/departments/
from: https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/ doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-0239. PMID: 16950971. equity-and-inclusion-cabinet/task-force-reparations
table/bostoncitymassachusetts/PST045223
15 Williams DR, Lawrence JA, Davis BA. Racism and 26 Mayor’s Office of Housing. Boston Housing
5 BPHC. BPHC Mission [01/07/25]. Available Health: Evidence and Needed Research. Annu Strategy 2025 [09/24/24]. Available from:
from: https://www.boston.gov/government/ Rev Public Health. 2019 Apr 1;40:105-125. https://www.boston.gov/departments/
cabinets/boston-public-health-commission/ housing/boston-housing-strategy-2025
about-health-commission 16 Churchwell K, Elkind MSV, Benjamin RM, et al.
Call to action: structural racism as a fundamental 27 City of Boston. (October 10, 2024). Mayor Wu signs
6 BPHC. Health Equity in All Policies Initiative driver of health disparities: a presidential executive order creating a Climate Council for
[08/17/22]. Available from: https://www.boston. advisory from the American Heart Association. the City of Boston [Press release]. https://www.
gov/government/cabinets/boston-public-health- Circulation. 2020;142(24):e454-e468. boston.gov/news/mayor-wu-signs-executive-
commission/racial-justice-and-health-equity/health- order-creating-climate-council-city-boston
equity-all-policies-initiative 17 Bailey ZD, Krieger N, Agénor M, et al. Structural
racism and health inequities in the USA: evidence and
interventions. Lancet. 2017 Apr 8;389(10077):1453-1463.

--- Page 33 ---
28 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
28 Planning Advisory Council. Planning Advisory 37 Altekruse SF, Cosgrove CM, Altekruse WC, 47 Pediatric Primary Hypertension: An
Council. Available from: https://www.boston. Jenkins RA, Blanco C. Socioeconomic risk Underrecognized Condition: A Scientific
gov/departments/planning-advisory-council factors for fatal opioid overdoses in the United Statement From the American Heart
States: Findings from the Mortality Disparities Association. https://www.ahajournals.org/
29 BPHC, We asked, you said, we did, and what
in American Communities Study (MDAC). PLoS doi/10.1161/HYP.0000000000000228
changed [11/12/24]. Available from: https://www.
One. 2020;15(1):e0227966. Published 2020
boston.gov/government/cabinets/boston-public- 48 BPHC. Health of Boston 2023: The Cancer
Jan 17. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0227966
health-commission/about-health-commission/ Report [2023]. Available from: https://www.
we-asked-you-said-we-did-and-what-changed 38 Dooley D, Wada R, Mehta A, et al. E. Data boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2023/05/
brief: Racial/ethnic differences in accessing HOB_Cancer_2023_FINAL_May11.pdf
30 Chen AT, Smith DO, Ojikutu BO, Auerbach J.
substance use disorder treatment following an
The Community As A Full Partner: A New Model 49 American Lung Association. (January 8, 2024). Lung
opioid overdose in Massachusetts and Boston
For Public Health. Health Aff (Millwood). 2024 Association report: High levels of cancer-causing
[2019]. Available from: https://www.boston.gov/
Jun;43(6):805-812. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2024.00033. radon gas detected in 21.8% of Massachusetts homes
sites/default/files/file/2021/03/DATA%20
[Press release]. Available from: https://www.lung.
31 BPHC. Boston Community Health Collaborative BRIEF%20-%20Racial%20Differences%20in%20
org/media/press-releases/radon-massachusetts
[01/06/25]. Available from: https:// Accessing%20Substance%20Use%20Disorder%20
www.boston.gov/government/cabinets/ in%20Massachusetts%20and%20Boston.pdf 50 BPHC. Health of Boston 2023: The Cancer
boston-public-health-commission/racial- Report [2023]. Available from: https://www.
39 City of Boston, Office of the Mayor. Coordinated
justice-and-health-equity/bostonchna boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2023/05/
Response Team [10/1/24]. Available from:
HOB_Cancer_2023_FINAL_May11.pdf
32 BPHC. Health of Boston, 2023 Provisional https://www.boston.gov/departments/
Mortality and Life Expectancy Report [2023]. mayors-office/coordinated-response-team 51 BPHC. Cancer Early Detection and Survivorship
Available from: https://www.boston.gov/ [01/02/25]. Available from: https://www.
40 BPHC. (October 2, 2024). New data suggest
sites/default/files/ file/2023/05/HOB_ boston.gov/government/cabinets/boston-
decreasing overdose deaths in Boston
Mortality_LE_2023_FINAL_May12.pdf public-health-commission/physical-health-
[Press release]. Available from: https://
and-wellness/chronic-disease-prevention/
33 Ojikutu, Bisola. (2024, Oct. 27 - 30). Moving www.boston.gov/news/new-data-suggest-
cancer-early-detection-and-survivorship
from Data to Action: Local Public Health decreasing-overdose-deaths-boston
Response to Life Expectancy Gaps in the US. 52 Su S., Jimenez M, Roberts C, Loucks E. The role of
41 Mayor’s Office. Low threshold transitional
[Conference session]. APHA Annual Meeting and adverse childhood experiences in cardiovascular
housing and shelter sites [10/10/23]. Available
Expo, 2024, Minneapolis, MN, United States. disease risk: A review with emphasis on plausible
from: https://www.boston.gov/departments/
mechanisms. Curr. Cardiol. Rep. 2015;17:88.
34 BPHC. (December 4, 2023). Inaugural Community mayors-office/low-threshold-sites
Health Equity Empowerment (CHEE) Fund 53 CDC. Adverse Childhood Experiences
42 Fine DR, Dickins KA, Adams LD, et al. Drug overdose
Recipients Announced [Press release]. Available [01/12/25]. Available from: https://www.
mortality among people experiencing homelessness,
from: https://www.boston.gov/news/inaugural- cdc.gov/aces/about/index.html
2003 to 2018. JAMA Netw Open. 2022;5(1):e2142676.
community-health-equity-empowerment-
54 American Heart Association. (May 5, 2023).
chee-fund-recipients-announced 43 BPHC. Public Brief: Overdose Prevention Centers
Mental wellness is important for a healthy heart
[March 2024]. Available from: https://www.boston.
35 BPHC. Boston Opioid Overdose Morality and brain [Press release]. Available from: https://
gov/sites/default/files/file/2024/03/OPC%20
2019-2023 [06/04/24]. https:// www.boston. newsroom.heart.org/news/mental-wellness-
Public%20Brief_Final%20Version_3.29.24_1.pdf
gov/sites/default/files/file/2024/06/ is-important-for-a-healthy-heart-and-brain
Boston%20Opioid%20 Overdose%20 44 BPHC. Health of Boston 2023: The Diabetes
55 Wijerantne T, Sales, C. Understanding why
Mortality%202019-2023%2004Jun24.pdf Report [2023]. Available from: https://www.
post-stroke depression may be the norm
boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2023/05/
36 BPHC. Health of Boston 2024 Data Update: Drug rather than the exception: The anatomical and
HOB_Diabetes_2023_FINAL_May11.pdf
and Opioid Mortality Report by Race/Ethnicity neuroinflammatory correlates of post-stroke
2019-2023 [2024]. Available from: https://www. 45 Duru OK, Harawa NT, Kermah D, Norris depression. J Clin Med. 2021 Apr; 10(8):1674.
boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2024/08/ KC. Allostatic load burden and racial
56 Strategic Prevention Technical Assistance Center.
Special_Report_Opioid_2024_Aug16_Final.pdf disparities in mortality. J Natl Med
Adverse Childhood Experiences and the Role of
Assoc. 2012 Jan-Feb;104(1-2):89-95.
Substance Misuse Prevention. Available from:
46 BPHC. Health of Boston 2023: The Heart Disease https://www.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/sptac-
Report [2023]. Available from: https://www. ace-role-of-substance-misuse-prevention.pdf
boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2023/05/
HOB_Heart_Disease_2023_FINAL_May11.pdf

--- Page 34 ---
29 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
57 Forrester S, Jacobs D, Zmora R, Schreiner P, Roger 67 Health Resources in Action. Boston BOLD
V, Kiefe CI. Racial differences in weathering and Project Community Needs Assessment Data Brief:
its associations with psychosocial stress: the Prevalence of Alzheimer’s/Dementia and Related
CARDIA study. SSM Popul Health. 2018;7:003-3. Risk Factors among Boston Residents [2022].
https://www.boston.gov/sites/default/files/
58 BPHC. Health of Boston 2024: The Mental
file/2023/03/BOLD%20Data%20Brief_1%20
Health Report [2024]. Available from: https://
Prevalance%20of%20Dementia%20and%20
www.boston.gov/sites/default/files/
Related%20Risk%20Factors_10.18.22_1.pdf
file/2024/03/HOB_MentalHealth_2024.pdf
68 BPHC. Addressing Alzheimer’s and Related
59 Frost, D. M., & Meyer, I. H. (2023). Minority stress
Dementias in the City of Boston: 2024-2026
theory: Application, critique, and continued
Strategic Plan [2023]. Available from: https://www.
relevance. Current Opinion in Psychology, 51, 101579
boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2023/11/
60 Penn Medicine. (November 9, 2020). Study Boston%20ADRD%20Strategic%20Plan%20
finds patients prefer doctors who share -%20FINAL%20November%202023.pdf
their same race/ethnicity [Press release].
Available from: https://www.pennmedicine.
org/news/news-releases/2020/november/
study-finds-patients-prefer-doctors-who-
share-their-same-race-ethnicity
61 BPHC. Health of Boston 2023: The Maternal and
Infant Health Report [2023]. Available from: https://
www.boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2023/10/
HOB_2023_Maternal_Infant_Final_Oct3.pdf
62 Health of Boston 2023: The Maternal and Infant
Health Report [2023]. Available from: https://www.
boston.gov/sites/default/files/file/2023/10/
HOB_2023_Maternal_Infant_Final_Oct3.pdf
63 Girardi, G, Longo, M & Bremer, A. Social
determinants of health in pregnant individuals
from underrepresented, understudied, and
underreported populations in the United
States. Int J Equity Health. 2023;22(1):186
64 Kennedy-Moulton K, Miller S, Persson P, et al.
Maternal and infant health inequality: New evidence
from linked administrative data. National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper No. 30693. 2022
65 Geronimus AT. Understanding and eliminating racial
inequalities in women’s health in the United States:
the role of the weathering conceptual framework.
J Am Med Women’s Assoc. 2001;56(4):133–6.
66 Massachusetts Healthy Aging Collaborative. Explore
the report (Accessed on 01/13/25). Accessible from:
https://mahealthyagingcollaborative.org/data-
report/explore-the-profiles/interactive-maps/

--- Page 35 ---
30 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thank you to the staff of the Boston Public Petrina Martin-Cherry, Boston Medical This acknowledgements page is not
Health Commission who provided support Center exhaustive. We are grateful for all the
for the development of this document: Dr. BPHC and City staff, community leaders,
Carlene Pavlos, Massachusetts Public Health
Bisola Ojikutu, Julia Frederick, Dr. Shoba Nair, community-based organizations, community
Alliance
Johnna Murphy, Pai En Yu, Andrew Lemos, health centers, hospitals, and foundations
Oami Amarasingham, Massachusetts Public
Isabella Bellini, Krystal Garcia, Melissa that are engaged in work every day to
Health Alliance
Hector, Tibrine da Fonseca, Triniese Polk, PJ eliminate long standing inequities in our city.
McCann, Dr. Michele Clark, Yailka Cardenas, Michael Curry, Esq., Massachusetts League of
Christian Arthur, Catrina Cooley, Leon Community Health Centers
Bethune, Beth Baker, Mary Bovenzi, Mark
Dr. Ann Hwang, Atrius Health Equity
Kennedy, Samara Grossman, Dr. Kevin Simon,
Foundation
Uchenna Ndulue, Becky Cruz-Crosson,
Robert Lewis, Jr, Boys and Girls Clubs of
Andrea Dettorre, and Eugene Barros.
Boston
Thank you to our City of Boston Cabinet and Bishop William Dickerson, Greater Love
Department colleagues: Equity and Inclusion; Tabernacle
Community Engagement; Economic
Magnolia Contreras, Dana-Farber Cancer
Opportunity and Inclusion; Environment,
Institute
Energy, and Open Space; Human Services;
Age Strong Commission; Boston Centers Pastor Chris Sumner, Jubilee Christian
for Youth and Families; Youth Engagement Church
and Advancement;Housing; Streets; Boston Dr. Jean Bonnet, Hyde Park Health Associates
Public Schools; Food Justice; Black Male
Pastor Dieufort Jean “Keke” Fleurissaint, True
Advancement; LGBTQIA2S+ Advancement;
Alliance Center
Parks and Recreation; and others.
Pastor Gloria White-Hammond, Bethel AME
Thank you to the many individuals who Church
provided review and support for this work,
Royal Smith, National Association for the
including:
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP),
Guale Valdez, Mattapan Community Health Boston Branch
Center
Vivien Morris, Mattapan Food and Fitness
Dr. Elsie Taveras, Mass General Brigham Coalition
Greg Wilmot, NeighborHealth
Rebecca Gutman, 1199SEIU United
Healthcare Workers East
Philly Laptiste, Community Care Cooperative
Dr. Thea James, Boston Medical Center

--- Page 36 ---
31 | LIVE LONG AND WELL
c All material contained in this report is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted
without special permission; however, a citation as to the source is appropriate.
SUGGESTED CITATION
Boston Public Health Commission, Live Long and Well: Boston’s Population Health Agenda to
Improve Life Expectancy and Equity (Boston, Massachusetts 2025).