--- Page 1 ---
MBTA Strategic Plan
Annual Update
Fiscal Year 2023 - 2024

--- Page 2 ---
Table of Contents Letter from the General Manager
Letter from the General Manager .................................................3 The MBTA continues to be in a time of significant transformation: we are
recovering from pandemic ridership declines, resolving safety challenges
Introduction to MBTA Strategic Goals..........................................4 and diligently responding to the Federal Transit Administration’s (FTA)
Safety Management Inspection, overcoming staffing shortages and
Safety ...............................................................................................6
steadfastly addressing other issues.
Modernization and State of Good Repair ....................................9 Since joining in 2023, I have focused everyone on repairing the MBTA’s
infrastructure and rebuilding our ridership to support and foster a thriving
Transparent Communication .......................................................11 economic region and restoring your trust in us. This report highlights the
progress the T has made in implementing the goals defined in our most
Mode Shift .....................................................................................13
recent strategic plan. It is a report on our accountability.
Service and Economic Vitality .....................................................15 We have more work to do in the coming years to achieve the goals in our
plan. To move that work forward we will explore the question, what does
Sustainability and Resilience ......................................................20 service mean? We will come back to you with our vision for better service
at the MBTA as we continue to rebuild a safe, reliable and efficient public
Workforce ......................................................................................22 transit system.
Communicating Our Costs ..........................................................26
Next Steps .....................................................................................28
Phil Eng
General Manager
MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 3

--- Page 3 ---
Introduction to MBTA Strategic Goals
The MBTA’s Strategic Plan and its mission, vision, goals and values advance our mission
of safety, service, sustainability, equity and culture is helping to shape “ We serve the public by providing safe, reliable,
the work and priorities of the MBTA. We are taking this opportunity to and accessible transportation.”
highlight our major accomplishments within each goal area for FY2024. and our vision
“ We envision a thriving region enabled by
Although not a comprehensive list, the initiatives and activities highlighted
best-in-class transit system.”
provide a flavor of the types of activities we engaged in FY2024 to
OUR GOALS INCLUDE:
Safety Modernization Transparent Workforce
Empower and support staff to develop and State of Communication Retain, attract, and invest in a diverse and
a culture which prioritizes and promotes qualified workforce that represents our
Good Repair Ensure the experiences and perspectives
safety ridership
of our staff and riders are accounted for
Efficiently modernize assets and improve
through transparent decision making
connectivity, while ensuring MBTA property
is maintained to a state of good repair
Service and Sustainability Mode Shift Communicating
Economic Vitality and Resilience Attract new riders, retain existing riders, Our Costs
and increase the percentage of transit-trips
Support the regional vitality by providing Increase the environmental sustainability Communicate openly about our costs and
in the region
dependable, frequent, and accessible and resilience of our transit system the revenue needed to support our ongoing
service that riders love service and the growth of our system
4 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024

--- Page 4 ---
Safety
Safety Safety Initiatives Underway Completed Commuter Rail Grade Crossings
The Safety Management System (SMS) enables the MBTA to proactively
246 railroad grade crossings were completed: adding lane and fog lines
manage and mitigate safety risks. It includes:
and reflective bollards and markers in the road and new brighter light
GOAL: Empower and support staff to develop a culture
emitting diode (LED) lights at the crossing gates. We also developed
Safety Management Policy aligns organizations under an SMS to
which prioritizes and promotes safety
technology partnerships with companies like Waze. These safety
prioritize safety in management decision making.
improvements have an added benefit of helping us deliver on operational
Safety Risk Management (SRM) identifies, evaluates, resolves and efficiencies and improve reliability.
Every employee at the MBTA is an agent of safety, and the Safety Overall Corrective Action Plan Progress tracks risk mitigations in a timely manner.
department works collaboratively to identify and mitigate workplace Safety Assurance (SA) collects, assesses and acts on data to meet Hi-Rail Training Program
hazards. Through adherence to the MBTA Safety Plan and a culture where
safety objectives and effectively mitigate risk.
In response to increased derailment of Hi-Rail equipment, a type of dual-
employees are informed about safety in all aspects of their lives, we strive
mode vehicle that can operate on both roads and railroad tracks, the
to keep our employees safe. 109 Safety Promotion supports workplace and public safety through
Rail Training Schools, Construction Logistics and Maintenance of Way
engagement, communication of key safety information and personnel
teams developed a Hi-Rail training program for construction contractors
FTA Safety Inspection Response training.
working on diversion projects. We now certify all contractors before they
In August 2022, FTA issued a Safety Management Inspection report, can use Hi-Rail equipment on the Right of Way (ROW).
highlighting several safety issues at the MBTA and the Department of
Public Utilities (DPU) that needed to be addressed. These included 20 Advance Mobile Flagger
127
395
findings for the MBTA in four focus areas.
Developed and delivered new training programs to support implementation
1. Managing the Impact of Operations, Maintenance and Capital Project of Advanced Mobile Flagger protection for workers on the ROW.
Requirements on the Existing Workforce.
2. Prioritization of Safety Management Information.
3. Effectiveness of Safety Communication.
4. Operating Conditions and Policies Procedures and Training.
The MBTA responded by creating the Quality, Compliance and Oversight
Overall Findings
(QCO) department and has made significant progress on improving
procedures, communications, hiring, etc. as well as on formal responses Total 42
to the Special Directives issued by FTA. Closed 12
Ongoing 30
6 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 7

--- Page 5 ---
Safety
Division Re-organization and Hiring Modernization and State of Good Repair
We reorganized the MBTA Safety Division to align with MBTA Safety
Priorities and SMS priorities and improve the effectiveness of safety
GOAL: Efficiently modernize assets and improve connectivity, while ensuring MBTA
oversight by filling key roles increasing safety staff from 46 to 78 by June
2024. property is maintained to a state of good repair
Safety Management System (SMS)
Implementation Plan Bringing the MBTA system to a state of good repair has been a major Implementing the Track Improvement Plan:
focus of the last year. We implemented closures and diversions across Removing Speed Restrictions
Conducted a gap analysis to identify opportunities to progress on SMS
the system and asked our customers for their patience as we mobilized
Implementation and in June 2024 published the plan. The Track Improvement Plan (TIP) is a major initiative to eliminate 191
to remove speed restrictions on our tracks. Through this work, we made
speed restrictions and bring all heavy and light rail tracks into a five-
significant progress.
Construction Safety year state of good repair by year-end 2024. Good repair means the
infrastructure is structurally sound, functional and meets all applicable
Safety staff maintained 24/7 coverage on all Track Improvement Plan
safety and performance standards. The program addresses infrastructure
surges and increased safety oversight of contractors.
on the Red, Orange, Green and Blue lines. By accelerating infrastructure
repairs in FY2024 the MBTA accomplished:
Safety Certification Program
Staff updated the Safety Certification Program which was accepted
and approved by the FTA in March 2024. Conducted ~1500 sessions to
train 98% of affected employees on the updated program. This program
addresses 3 key areas:
130 12,973
1. System Safety and Security
2. Fire Life Safety Speed Restrictions Eliminated Ties Replaced
3. Occupational Safety
Risk Management
Closed out all overdue incident investigations and revamped the Safety
43 82,796
Hotline with the addition of safetyhotline@mbta.com and the Safety
Hotline Portal.
Minutes Returned to Riders Feet of Rail Replaced
8 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 9

--- Page 6 ---
Modernization and State of Good Repair
Acquired New Orange and Red Line Vehicles Acquired for Commuter Rail Operations Transparent Communication
To realize on-time delivery improvements, the T renegotiated its contract Widett Circle is a 24-acre site near South Station that the MBTA purchased
for new heavy rail vehicles. Through the end of FY2024 we have received to build a new commuter rail layover facility. When constructed, the
GOAL: Ensure the experiences and perspectives of our staff and riders are accounted
124 of 152 Orange Line cars and 22 of 252 Red Line cars. much-needed layover will reduce deadhead miles by more than 50,000
per year and will reduce congestion on the Fairmount line, enabling more for through transparent decision making.
Designed New Green Line Type 10 Supercars frequent service on that line and the Worcester Line.
We awarded an $811M contract for delivery of 100 light rail vehicles and
Reopened Stations to Attract and Retain Daily speed restrictions over last 30 days as
Transparency with the public is key to the MBTA’s success. This year we
engaged riders and incorporated their feedback on the exterior design.
Riders a percentage of the entire subway system.
launched several communication initiatives to proactively communicate
The new Green Line supercar will be 40 feet longer than the current Green
out the status of our work.
Line vehicles and include state-of-the-art communication systems, In fall 2022, we closed the Lynn Commuter Rail Station on the Top line represents the system-wide percentage.
accessibility improvements like wider doors and the latest generation of Newburyport/Rockport Line to address potential station deterioration
Spilling the T launched in October
crash-safety technology which will create a safer environment for both issues. We began construction of the Lynn interim station in September 6.6% 6.6%
2023. This monthly podcast takes Click
operators and riders. 2023 and completed the work in December 2023 - restoring commuter below
the public behind-the-scenes at the 5.1%
rail service 9 months ahead of schedule. 4.8%
T to hear directly from MBTA leaders,
including the Secretary of Transportation
Ashland Station was reopened on the Framingham/Worcester
and General Manager (GM), as well as
Commuter Rail line. While renovations were performed at Ashland
prominent transportation advocates.
Station, those who needed to get from Framingham Station to an
M 1.4% 1.6%
A
a
s h
c
l
o
an
m
d
p l
S
et
t
e
a ti
r
o
e
n
s to
w
r
e
a
r
t
e
io n
m o
o
v
f
e
t
d
he
v
p
ia
e d
s
e
h
s
u
t
t
r
t
i
l
a
e
n
b
o
u
v
s
e
.
r
W
pa
o
s
r
s
k
,
i
p
n
l
c
a
l
t
u
fo
d
r
e
m
d
BTA
Podcast
(cid:16)
(cid:22)(cid:31)(cid:30)
(cid:15)
(cid:21)(cid:29)
(cid:14)
(cid:20)(cid:28)
(cid:14)
(cid:27)(cid:19)
(cid:13)
(cid:26)(cid:18)
(cid:20)
(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:24)
(cid:12)
(cid:23)
A
n
h
e
o
c
t
n
r
t
o
e
e
s
s
d
s
t
t
d
e
1
i
n
2
a
s
lo
e
o
g
p
f
u
i
t
s
e
h
o
.
o
d
u
e
s
s
a
,
n
S
d
p
s
i
o
lli
f
n
s
g
t re
th
a
e
m
T
s w
h
i
a
th
s
0
0
.
.
2
0
%
%
0
0
.
.
2
0
%
%
resurfacing, as well as installation of digital signage.
In April of 2023 we updated our Public
South Attleboro Station, on the Providence/Stoughton
Engagement Plan, which guides our strategy for engaging with the public.
line, reopened in May, increasing service to the community
Improvement Plan. Following every diversion, in-depth recap videos
during morning and afternoon rush hours.
Our On-line Safety Dashboard allows the public to see the status of the featuring the MBTA workforce not only highlights the work accomplished,
T’s progress in responding to FTA Safety Management Inspection Special but also explains the service benefit it provides for our riders. Each week,
Directives. dozens of posts across multiple platforms are shared with the T’s nearly
half a million followers to inform stakeholders of long and short-term
The Speed Restrictions Dashboard provides riders with up-to-date
plans, celebrate recent accomplishments and earn confidence in the path
information on speed restrictions across the MBTA system.
forward – in total garnering more than 1 billion impressions each year.
The MBTA has a Digital Strategy that has produced engaging
informative video content for our riders and employees dating back to
the Building a Better T customer awareness campaign in 2019. This year,
the we provided an informative, all-access look at the successful Track
10 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 11

--- Page 7 ---
Transparent Communications
Staff Communications in the media. GM Updates are emailed to all employees and provided to Mode Shift
employees without email access through other internal communication
In addition to increased transparency with the public, improved
methods.
communication with staff was a focus of our work this past year. Given
GOAL: Attract new riders, retain existing riders and increase
the size of the MBTA, our 65+ work sites and round-the-clock operations, T Insights is a new internal initiative to
ensuring that all staff have the same access to information has been a promote employee engagement across the the percentage of transit trips in the region
core challenge that our leadership has worked to resolve. Authority and to share information on MBTA
projects, initiatives and successes. Guests are
The MBTA General Manager and members of the leadership team hosted
interviewed and engage with questions asked Foxboro Service
Employee Town Halls and Roundtables. These sessions are intended
by employees. Recent topics have included
for senior leadership and employees to listen, address issues and share On October 2, 2023, the MBTA’s 2022 Commuter Rail service pilot to
Employee Resources, Workplace Development
concerns with the goal of bridging the communication gap between Foxboro became permanent. The new Foxboro service includes ten
and Strategic Planning.
leadership and the workforce. weekday round trips between Foxboro and Boston and parking at
Between the Lines is the MBTA’s quarterly employee magazine that Foxboro Station.
GM Updates and other leadership communications are intended to
profiles employees and departments,
provide news and information to the workforce before hearing of events
and informs the workforce of events, Transit Priority Projects
projects and initiatives important to
Massachusetts Avenue, Arlington
our ability to deliver safe and reliable
service. Copies are mailed to every This collaborative effort aims to improve transit
MBTA employee to help us share for nearly 5,000 daily bus riders on Route 77
our successes. and enhance pedestrian safety. The project
includes the addition of an outbound lane from
E-mail for All Alewife Brook Parkway to the opposite side of
Employees Lafayette Street.
Water Transportation Expansion
At the start of the fiscal year, our
Gateway East, Brookline
4,000 frontline employees did The MBTA made significant investments to support water transportation
This year-long pilot, funded by a MassDOT
not have MBTA email accounts. in the Commonwealth. Under General Manager Eng, a new position was
Shared Streets and Spaces grant, introduced
This added complexity to all-staff created. The Director of Commuter Ferry will serve as the point of contact
bus-only lanes and transit signal priority on
communications. Improving email for all the MBTA’s ferry operations. In the spring/summer of 2023 the
Washington Street, benefiting 15,000 daily
access was identified as a priority in town halls and round tables and MBTA added 3 new ferry routes serving East Boston, Winthrop/Quincy
riders on Routes 60, 65 and 66.
through our annual employee survey. Email access for frontline staff and Lynn. With MassDOT’s summer closures of the Sumner Tunnel for
began to roll out this year. reconstruction, the new ferry service provided a critical connection for the
Broadway under Revere Beach Parkway,
East Boston community. The T also purchased a new ferry to serve the
Revere
Lynn route in 2024.
The project extends the southbound morning peak-only bus lane, which
serves more than 11,600 daily riders on Routes 116 and 117.
12 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 13

--- Page 8 ---
Mode Shift
Advancing Bus Network Redesign (BNR) Updated system maps Service and Economic Vitality
Implementation
As part of Bus Network Redesign implementation, we are updating and
The first BNR service changes will launch as Phase 1 in December 2024, replacing our maps - including the Rapid Transit Line (aka “spider map”),
GOAL: Support the regional vitality by providing dependable,
increasing total estimated service hours across the sum of Routes 86, Bus Connections and “You Are Here” maps. The new maps – which will
104*, 109*, 110*, 116*, and 117 by 60% (over Winter 2023 service levels). be installed at stations, in railcars and in shelters show new connections frequent, and accessible service that riders love
The service changes also include new connections from Malden and in the Frequent Bus Route network, improve brand consistency and
Everett to Airport and Harvard Stations, 6 new bus stop pairs and 4 new improve legibility including increased contrast for colorblind users.
Frequent Routes*. Worcester Union Station Platform Opened
The new, high-level, center-running platform at Worcester Union station
Surveying bus stops
opened to passengers on Monday, July 1, 2024, and improves Union
We are developing an inventory of stop
station’s functionality, ridership capacity, safety and is fully accessible.
conditions and quality to have accurate
information about the state of good repair
of all bus stops. This inventory allows us to
centrally initiate tickets to fix issues. The MBTA
has audited over 3,100 (45% of all stops) and
replaced or fixed over 500 signs.
Improved bus stop signs
We are making the bus system more legible by
adding new bus stop signage. The new signs
are larger and easier to read and designate
frequent routes that come at least every
15 minutes. We are also making new signs
double-sided, allowing approaching riders
to see signs from both directions. The larger
text is now ADA-compliant and we added a
legend to explain new icons in response to Contactless Payments (AFC 2.0) Implemented
rider feedback.
MBTA is transitioning to a new fare system to make it easier for riders. Opened New Charlie Service Center
The new system replaces current technology with new ways to pay—
To mitigate recurring maintenance concerns and to provide a better
including, contactless credit/debit card, phone or smart watch. Available
experience for riders and employees, the MBTA relocated its Charlie
on demand payment is designed to be used on buses (including the Silver
Service Center to 296 Washington Street. The new facility is fully
Line), heavy rail, light rail and the Mattapan Line.
accessible and centrally located at the street level in downtown Boston.
14 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 15

--- Page 9 ---
Service and Economic Vitality Service and Economic Vitality
Accessibility Improvements Transit-Oriented
Development &
Designs have advanced for major accessibility upgrades at 29 currently
Innovative Delivery
inaccessible Green Line stops. Additionally, the MBTA received a $67
(TOD/ID)
million grant from the FTA to support this work specifically on the B and
C branches. Development projects and partnerships
across the service area improve MBTA
Free Standing Mini High Platforms infrastructure, address housing needs
and build regional economic growth. In
Formalized innovative solution and advanced designs for freestanding
FY24 we:
mini high platforms at select Commuter Rail stations enabling us to
provide accessibility at roughly 10 inaccessible stations over the next
• Developed a new Kendall/MIT
year.
Inbound headhouse - a $30+ million
private investment by MIT, open to
Launch of “Access in Motion”
the public.
campaign
• Supported another $350+ million
Raising awareness regarding
in improvements to MBTA facilities
the importance and benefits of
and infrastructure as part of private
accessibility.
development projects.
• Established collaborative real estate
Staffing and Training
agreements to support TOD projects
• Increased staffing levels
in Attleboro, Boston, Salem,
of Transit Ambassadors at
The Charlie Service Center provides services to: Swampscott and Winchester.
subway stations across the
system.
• Buy passes for any mode.
• Developed first ever full day
• Replace a damaged or expired CharlieCard.
training for accessibility
• Request a Senior CharlieCard, Transportation Access Pass (TAP) or
policies and procedures for
Blind Access Pass.
Transit Ambassadors.
• Process a name change on a Senior CharlieCard, Transportation
1,700+ 13.1 Million
Access Pass (TAP) or Blind Access Pass with a valid ID.
• Add credit to a RIDE account.
TOD housing units in progress SF commercial space in planning or
• Connect reduced fare benefits to a contactless payment method. construction
4,004+ additional housing units in supported
projects adjacent to MBTA infrastructure
16 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 17

--- Page 10 ---
Service and Economic Vitality Service and Economic Vitality
Service Enhancements by Mode
Weekday Ridership Continues to Grow
Commuter Rail Ferry
• Increased Fairmount frequency to 30 minutes, • Added weekend service on the Lynn ferry route in the
7 days a week. spring of 2024.
MBTA Average MBTA Average
• Reintroduced a Worcester Express Train. • Initiated purchase of 2 new ferry vessels to serve the
Weekday Ridership Weekday Ridership
• Resumed service at South Attleboro. Winthrop and Quincy routes.
751,579 793,621
• Return of Commuter Rail to Lynn. Heavy and Light Rail
• Increased weekend frequency and added late night
• The Red Line operated about 300 trips per weekday
for June 2023 For June 2024 service on all lines.
(versus 249 in June 2023). The time between trains
• Ridership Recovery of 85-90%. improved on the Ashmont and Braintree branches to
Ridership by mode Ridership by mode about 14.5 minutes (versus 18.5 minutes in June 2023)
Bus
and to about seven minutes on the Red Line “trunk”
• Reduced the number of “dropped” trips from more than
49% 45% between Alewife and JFK/UMass (versus about nine
8.3% in June 2023 to about 1.7% in June 2024.
minutes in June 2023).
Subway | 368,458 Subway | 359,402 • Introduced peak period frequency improvements.
• The Orange Line operated 284 trips per weekday (versus
• Made schedule adjustments to improve reliability and 200 in June 2023). The time between trains improved to
37% 39% more accurately reflect service operations. about eight minutes (versus 11.6 minutes in June 2023).
• Instituted routing changes. • The Blue Line operated 357 trips per weekday (versus
Bus | 281,611 Bus | 305,604
• Incorporated bus lane improvements. 295 in June 2023). The time between trains improved by
over half a minute to about five minutes (versus nearly six
Paratransit
12% 15%
minutes in June 2023).
• In June 2024, the RIDE’s on-time performance reached a
• The Green Line median weekday peak headways are
Commuter Rail | 92,935 Commuter Rail |118,107 record high of 94%, exceeding the MBTA’s overall goal of
down to 2-3 minutes and averaging 80 more daily trips
90% on-time performance and above its lowest average
since June 2023.
0.5% 0.5% over the past 12 months of 85%.
• Mattapan is averaging 80 more daily trips since
• The RIDE Access Center, (its dispatching and scheduling
June 2023.
The RIDE | 3,550 The RIDE | 3,952
center) substantially reduced average call wait times from
All
13 minutes 22 seconds in April 2023 to 19 seconds in
0.7% 0.8% June 2024, beating its goal of a two-minute wait time. • Extended service and other enhancements for special
events such as the Boston Marathon, Celtics Parade,
Ferry | 5,025 Ferry | 6,556
July 4, St. Patrick’s Day, New Year’s Eve.
Note: The figures listed above reflect weekdays without service suspensions.
18 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 19

--- Page 11 ---
Sustainability and Resilience
Sustainability and Resilience Staffed to Advance Climate Policy and Communities (BRIC) grant from FEMA provides half of the funding
and Planning to deploy hinged flood doors, upgrade 2 pump rooms and convert the
overhead contact system to third rail.
A new team was announced in September 2023 and fully staffed as of
GOAL: Increase the environmental sustainability and resilience of our transit system
August 2024 to center climate policy and planning in the T’s work. The
group’s Climate Assessment, which provides a roadmap for their work,
was presented to the Board in April 2024 and will be released this fall.
Advanced Fleet Electrification
They have been coordinating with MassDOT, the Executive Office of
This year, we made progress in our work to electrify our fleets and facilities. Energy and Environmental Affairs and other stakeholders to advance the
We awarded our first ever contract to pilot battery-electric Commuter State’s response to climate change. The new group works in partnership
Rail service, focusing on the Fairmount Line, where we are planning for with the Environmental Department, which has also added new resilience
trains every 20 minutes by 2028. We furthered the Bus and energy program staff.
Electrification Plan, approving a new contract for the
Quincy bus maintenance facility in October 2023 and Advanced Flood Protection Measures
breaking ground on the North Cambridge retrofit in Spring
The Blue Line Airport Tunnel Portal is a highly vulnerable part of our
2024, as well as adding charging capacity at Cabot and
system that the T is working to protect through our system-wide tunnel
Charlestown bus yards.
flood protection program. A $10 million Building Resilient Infrastructure
We are also launching an electrification study for The
RIDE and purchased 16 battery-electric non-revenue Secured Grants and Completed Studies
vehicles.
Bus electrification advanced with new federal funding including $40 million
awarded in July 2024 through the Low or No Emission Grant Program, in
Decommissioned 120 Orange Line
addition to $116 million awarded in FY22.
Train Cars
Received a $35 million allocation toward battery-electric bus facilities over
As we brought new Orange Line cars into service,
the FY25-29 period through the U.S. DOT Carbon Reduction Program
we focused on decommissioning and recycling the
administered by MassDOT.
vehicles taken out of service. We salvaged material for
memorabilia and recycling (including non ferrous metal, A Tufts study on the impact of heat on employees and facilities was
aluminum, light iron and heavy steel) and oversaw the completed: Beating the Heat: Documenting and Enhancing the MBTA’s
disposal of the remaining non-recyclable components. Responses to Extreme Heat Events.
The lessons we learned from this effort will be applied to the upcoming
decommissioning of the Red Line fleet.
20 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 21

--- Page 12 ---
Workforce Hiring and Supporting Our Workforce
We undertook new approaches to identify, attract and support our diverse
workforce by:
GOAL: Retain, attract, and invest in a diverse and qualified workforce
• Hiring over 100 Track Laborers through an innovative Hiring-On-The-Spot
that represents our ridership
event.
• Offering better transparency and service through the new workforce
management portal for employees.
This year, we focused on • Improved holiday pay for employees working on Thanksgiving and
the people who make the Christmas. • Starting bus operator new hires as full-time employees, helping to
MBTA run. Investments in our support a wider pool of candidates interested in investing in a career at
• Clarification of compensatory time for salaried employees.
workforce will enable us to the MBTA.
• Expansion of bereavement leave to include domestic partners.
provide the level of service our
• Launching in-person new hire orientation.
riders expect while enabling
Rebuilding Our Workforce • Revamping the instructional design process and completing 23 large
safe operations that protect
scale projects.
our workforce and riders. We exceeded by 125 our FY24 hiring goal of 2,020 vacancies filled. We
are also making great strides to rebuild our workforce to meet safety and • Designing an optional skills training for employees seeking advancement.
service goals.
• Providing Leadership Development training 300+ managers.
Successfully
• Continuing to support and elevate diverse voices at the MBTA through
Negotiated Agreements with our Affiliated 8,000
our Multicultural, Veteran’s, Pride, Women’s and Accessibility and
7,573
Labor Unions
Inclusion Employee Resource Groups (ERGs) as well as through the
For the first time since 2010, the MBTA has up-to-date agreements with MBTA Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Employee Advisory Group.
its 28 labor unions. These agreements, which cover the four-year term
7,000
from 2024 through 2027, include:
• Enhanced wages and incentives to boost recruitment and retention.
• Improvements to wages in critical frontline positions, frontline
6,000
workers working on overnight shifts.
FY19 FY20
• Retention bonuses to retain retirement-eligible frontline employees.
22 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 23
SEEYOLPME
LATOT
Workforce
FY21 FY22 FY23 FY24

--- Page 13 ---
Workforce Workforce
Changes to the Training School to An Innovation Expo Highlighted the Ingenuity
Meet 2024 Hiring Goals of Our Staff
To support Bus and Heavy Rail, hiring targets, the T made The MBTA hosted its first Innovation Expo in June of 2024. This forum
changes to its training school including: increasing training showcased the work of 34 home grown innovations from the across the T
staff, launching a new training center in South Station and and celebrated our employees’ achievements. The T defines innovations
refining our training curriculum with the introduction of a as the implementation of new ideas, processes, or ways of working that
new internal certification program and new training content have a positive impact and value to the MBTA. Over 200 people attended
across all schools. the Expo. Innovations exhibited included:
• Data and Digital Tools to Enhance Strategic Decision-making.
Bus Operations Training Relief
Program • Efficiency Improvements.
• Customer Experience Improvements.
In late 2023 Bus Operations introduced the Training Relief
program to schedule training and professional development • Safety, Quality, and Employee Experience Improvements.
for bus operators. The Bus Training School now facilitates
and delivers 5 days of training for every bus operator every
2 years. The program is expected to expand to Heavy and
Light Rail employees in early 2025.
24 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 25

--- Page 14 ---
Communicating Our Costs
Communicating Our Costs Funding Equitable Access to Transit Pursuing Grants to Bridge Funding Gaps
The MBTA board approved and staff implemented a new Income-eligible To leverage the MBTA’s own capital investments and address funding
Reduced Fare Program. This program, designed to provide half-priced shortfalls, the T aggressively pursues eligible discretionary funding
GOAL Communicate openly about our costs and the revenue needed to support our
fares to riders under 200% of the Federal Poverty Level, is expected to opportunities to help the Authority achieve its strategic priorities. This
ongoing service and the growth of our system serve 60,000 riders and increase trip-making for these riders by 25-30%. past year, we submitted 13 applications and secured more than $130M in
Federal discretionary funding, including:
This year, the MBTA strived to increase transparency and communication Explaining the History of MBTA Funding
about our costs and the needed revenue to support our existing and
The MBTA is facing a fiscal cliff in FY25, with a $255.7 million budget
future operations. The MBTA has significant infrastructure needs and
shortfall projected. How did we get here? Through participation in the
staffing shortfalls to fill, and yet we are facing a serious operating budget
State’s Transportation Funding Task Force, presentations to the MBTA
$22.4 Million
shortfall in Fiscal Year 2026, which will need to be addressed.
Board and transparent communication through the Spilling the T podcast,
we have told the story of our funding challenges. In January 2024, we
from Rebuilding American Infrastructure with Sustainability and Equity
Identifying the Cost of State of Good Repair
highlighted the history of MBTA funding and financing the future in an
(RAISE) for Lower Broadway Transit Priority Corridor.
episode entitled “Financing the Future.”
To continue transparent communication about the MBTA’s costs and
revenue needs, the Capital Needs Assessment was presented to the
Board of Directors in November 2023. This latest assessment was built
based on extensive analysis of asset condition data and highlighted a
$24.5 billion replacement cost to bring the MBTA to a State of Good $40 Million
Repair.
from Low or No Emission Grant Program for
Battery-Electric Bus Procurement.
$67.6 Million
from All Stations Accessibility Program (ASAP) for
Green Line Accessibility Improvements.
26 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024 27
ERAF
DECUDER
draCeilrahC

--- Page 15 ---
Next Steps
Over the past year, the MBTA has made
significant strides to improve our service and
state of good repair, build our safety culture,
increase our sustainability and support our
workforce. Notably, we began electrification
of our Commuter Rail, a mode where ridership
rebounded to near pre-pandemic levels; we
modernized our assets reducing slow zones
on our heavy rail lines through our Track
Improvement Program; we rebuilt our workforce
and provided better wages for our frontline
Transit Vision Long-Range Outcomes and
employees; and we improved communications
Capital Plan Metrics
As we bring our system to a state of good
with the public and our employees. We will
repair, we are also thinking ahead about our (Program for Mass
Our Transit Vision will also inform the continue to communicate transparently about
vision for the service we want to provide to
Transportation) development of outcomes to guide the
our riders. This fall, we are developing a our work to implement the goals set out in
implementation of our strategic plan. We will
vision for service across all MBTA modes.
Work on the T’s Long-Range Capital Plan, be finalizing metrics to track our progress. our strategic plan and build a safe, reliable
the Program for Mass Transportation, is and accessible MBTA. We will also continue
beginning this fall. This plan will provide an
to enhance service to meet the needs of our
opportunity to gather public feedback and
evaluate how different projects can help ridership and to support the economic, climate
achieve the T’s goals.
and housing goals of the Commonwealth.
28 MBTA Strategic Plan Report 2024

--- Page 16 ---
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority | 10 Park Plaza, Boston, MA