--- Page 1 ---
MBTA
Strategic Planning
Authority-Wide Goals and Metrics
Final Report January 2024

--- Page 2 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
Contents
Letter from the General Manager ....................................................................................3
Introduction ........................................................................................................................4
Strategic Planning Background .......................................................................................5
Strategic Planning Purpose ..............................................................................................5
Framework and Approach ................................................................................................5
2020 Mission, Vision, and Values .....................................................................................6
Culture, Collaboration and Communications .................................................................6
Workforce Investments .....................................................................................................6
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion ........................................................................................6
Early Actions Supporting the 2020 Strategic Plan .........................................................7
2022 Strategic Planning: Process Overview ...................................................................8
Process Overview .............................................................................................................8
Re-affirmed Mission and Vision .......................................................................................8
Process Design .................................................................................................................8
Document Review .............................................................................................................8
Facilitation Design .............................................................................................................9
2022 Strategic Planning: Goals and Metrics .................................................................10
Values Refined ................................................................................................................11
Goals and Metrics Development ....................................................................................13
MBTA Goals and Metrics ...............................................................................................13
What’s Next? ....................................................................................................................15
Where We Are in the Process and Next Steps ..............................................................16
2

--- Page 3 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
Letter from the General Manager
Dear Colleagues,
I’m pleased to introduce the MBTA’s Strategic Plan that was presented to our Board The goals highlight developing a safety culture; modernizing our system, improving
of Directors in August of 2023. As we launch this plan, the MBTA is in the midst of connectivity, and bringing our assets to a state of good repair; employing transpar-
coping with the residual impacts on ridership since the COVID-19 pandemic, re- ent decision-making; building and retaining a diverse workforce; recognizing the
sponding to the FTA safety management inspection, and implementing the Track importance of our service and its impact on our communities and our economy;
Improvement Plan to reduce slow zones and eliminating speed restrictions. Now, enhancing system sustainability and resiliency; increasing ridership and supporting
more than ever, it is important to have a long-term plan that guides the organization mode shift; and improving open communication about the costs and revenue need-
forward as we tackle these short term, complex challenges. ed to support our service.
Our mission remains constant – to serve the public by providing safe, reliable, and I will provide periodic updates and more details about our goals, and the strategies
accessible transportation. This plan includes our previous statements of our values and initiatives that are being undertaken to achieve those goals. In the meantime, I
of safety, service, sustainability, and updated values for equity and culture. These ask that you to take the time to familiarize yourselves with the goals and to consider
values better reflect who we are and who we want to be and our impact on our em- how your work aligns with them. Using this plan as a guide, we will build on the
ployees, riders, and the communities we serve, and prioritizes people and safety in significant progress we’ve already made, support the state’s economy, and execute
the work we do. on our long-range vision.
Our Strategic Plan is a living document that was developed with input from people Thank you,
across the organization. It provides the core strategic vision for our organization,
with the flexibility to evolve to meet the ever-changing, and sometimes unexpected,
needs of our customers and region. Executing on the Strategic Plan will help restore
the MBTA’s reputation, building a safe, reliable and resilient system customers can
depend on, and will evolve an organizational culture that values a diverse workforce Phil Eng
that represents our ridership. General Manager & CEO
3

--- Page 4 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
Introduction
The Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA), or the Authority, is the priorities and goals to insure they are implementable. Although built upon the earlier
largest transit system in Massachusetts and one of the oldest in the US, providing strategic planning work, this plan went further by:
subway, bus, commuter rail, ferry, and paratransit service to eastern Massachusetts
• identifying potential conflicting priorities across departments,
and parts of Rhode Island. The MBTA employs more than 7,000 employees who
serve our customers. Throughout 2022, the MBTA engaged in a staff-led strategic • assessing projects across the Authority that may not meet, and may even
planning process to guide the Authority’s work over the coming decade, to align our potentially impede, broader Authority goals,
internal priorities, and to inform our long-range planning activities.
• ensuring that all staff are prepared and ready to implement the goals.
The purpose was to set Authority-wide goals and metrics, built on the MBTA’s pre- In a previous planning phase in 2020, the MBTA established the mission, vision, and
vious strategic planning work in 2020. The MBTA’s strategic planning is an ongoing values for the Authority, creating a high-level sense of purpose in the T’s work. The
process that will be revisited over time as the Authority evolves. The goals and met- Authority’s mission and vision have not changed in the latest plan; however, this
rics are intended to guide both day-to-day decision-making and help the Authority recent planning refreshed the Authority’s values and took the work further by estab-
think longer-term about how to achieve its desired outcomes and embrace the or- lishing goals to guide the Authority’s actions and metrics to help us track progress.
ganization’s values. Over the course of four months, a diverse group of more than 150 staff from across
the Authority were actively and intentionally engaged in crafting goals and metrics
The planning process was designed to support the Authority’s ongoing transforma-
to guide the MBTA’s work. This document reflects the expertise, time, intention, and
tion, by breaking down silos within the Authority, elevating the importance of people
experience of the MBTA’s staff and sets a clear direction for the Authority’s work in
at the MBTA, and responding to current challenges and disruptions, reframing them
the coming years.
as opportunities for transformation. These opportunities and challenges included
the FTA safety management inspection, workforce shortages, and simultaneous
transitions in MBTA, MassDOT, and government leadership. The process leveraged
the knowledge of the MBTA’s staff as experts on the Authority’s needs and on the
important role that workplace culture has on both the workforce and their ability to
achieve the organization’s goals.
The MBTA recognized it had a unique opportunity to set long range goals and mea-
sures for success while at the same time promoting Authority coordination, integra-
tion, and planning. This Authority-wide, staff-driven process fully examined possible
4

--- Page 5 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
Strategic Planning Background
Strategic Planning Purpose and moved to what we want to accomplish and how to measure our progress in our
2022 work. In the coming years, the MBTA will continue its strategic planning by de-
Combined with the Authority’s mission, vision, and values, the goals and metrics
fining the steps we will take to achieve our goals. The role of these various strategic
defined in this report will guide the work of the MBTA over the coming years as it
planning elements is described below:
responds to operation and safety challenges and transforms to meet both external
demands and the internal culture changes needed to better support our staff, riders,
Figure 1: Strategic Planning framework
and the regions we serve. Our strategic plan has been shaped by our previous plans
and commitments as well as by the input and expertise of our workforce. The plan 4
Mission what we do
is intended to:
4
• Provide an opportunity for the Authority to adapt and evolve to changes in the Vision what we aspire to be
region.
4
Values the principles that guide us in our work
• Help the Authority prioritize goals, its employees, and monetary capital.
44
• Clarify multimodal priorities aligned to our values and incorporate those priorities Goals how we achieve our vision and mission
into planning and financial programming.
44
Metrics how we will track our progress
• Support the alignment of our internal departments and staff to Authority-wide
goals.
444
Objectives our priorities to achieve our goals
• Determine metrics for success that can be used to track progress.
444
Strategies specific steps to achieve objectives
Framework and Approach
In our ongoing strategic planning, the MBTA has aspired to shift the Authority’s 4 Completed in 2020 | 44 2022 Project | 444 2024 Work
culture by both centering the experiences of our employees and by agreeing to a
framework before setting actions or prioritizing specific projects. Therefore, in 2020
Through the development of these strategic planning elements, the MBTA will have
we started from broad agreement on what we do and who we are,
a comprehensive framework to guide the Authority’s work in the years to come.
5

--- Page 6 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
2020 Mission, Vision, and Values
In its 2020 work, the MBTA developed the mission, vision, and values of the Author- This process also revealed that the challenges the organization faced were deeply
ity and focused on improving operations by addressing key internal organizational rooted in the Authority’s culture. In response, the MBTA identified three internal pri-
priorities. This work served as an opportunity to create a shared sense of purpose ority areas for continued improvement and investment:
while beginning the work of reshaping the Authority’s culture and highlighting pres-
Culture, Collaboration and Communications
sure points for the workforce. Through this work, the MBTA developed the following:
Improve internal engagement and collaborative decision-making processes
Workforce Investments
Recognize our diverse talent and provide opportunities for meaningful professional
We serve the public by providing safe, development and career pathways
reliable, and accessible transportation. Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Invest in becoming a more diverse, equitable, and inclusive organization
Given the timing of the pandemic and the unexpected burdens on the system that
followed, the MBTA temporarily paused the continuation of its strategic planning
We envision a thriving region enabled
until the Fall of 2022. However, the Authority made progress in aligning its work to
by a best-in-class transit system. its values and developing new actions to address the three internal priorities set in
2020.
Our work is guided in the principles of
safety, service, equity and sustainability.
6

--- Page 7 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
Early Actions Supporting the 2020 Strategic Plan
Culture, Collaboration, and Communication
• Improved employee communications, particularly for frontline employees through
installation of digital screens (TCOMMS), use of employee newsletter (Between The
Lines), and creation of new intranet site (TSTOP).
• Implemented an annual staff survey to gather regular feedback from staff about
employee satisfaction and workplace culture.
Workforce Investments
• Developed a new leadership development training program for managers, training 150
supervisors to date in adaptive leadership.
• Launched the ideal program – Individuals Defining Excellence and Leadership –
designed to build on the knowledge base of MBTA employees and to expand their
awareness of the challenges the MBTA faces in safety, service delivery, and public
perception.
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
• Formed a DEI Employee Advisory Council consisting of 15-20 staff representing many
identities and roles within the T.
• Hired staff to support a new department focused on diversity, equity, and inclusion.
7

--- Page 8 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
2022 Strategic Planning: Process Overview
Process Overview
From August through December 2022, the MBTA returned to its strategic planning concurrent FTA safety management inspection report findings, but not to lose
work to build on the existing mission, vision, and values and deepen the Authority’s momentum since the development of shared goals would be an opportunity to
alignment by establishing goals and identifying metrics to track progress. Through- respond to the safety concerns and other challenges while not losing sight of
out the fall, more than 150 MBTA staff engaged in a series of meetings to frame the need to plan for the future.
the Authority’s goals and metrics, as well as to identify next steps for achieving
the goals. The development of the Authority’s goals and metrics was orchestrated
• We agreed to be honest about real resource constraints and the gap
through an intentional process that engaged stakeholders and built upon the foun-
between what we have and what we need for success. For years, the MBTA
dation of the MBTA’s past planning efforts.
has prioritized operations despite financial, operational, and labor constraints.
In this work, we agreed to focus on the right goals, while being honest that
Re-affirmed Mission and Vision
some goals may require changes to resources to achieve.
As this next phase of the strategic planning process commenced, we determined it
was important to ground the work to the 2020 strategic plan. The mission and vision
• We agreed that strategic planning at the T would be iterative and ongoing.
statement were that grounding. At the start of the process we re-affirmed our com-
While this phase of the project was designed to update values and identify
mitment to the previously defined mission and vision.
goals and metrics, we recognized that planning would need to be continued
Mission: We serve the public by providing safe, reliable, and accessible transpor- later to flesh out objectives and strategies. Additionally, we built into the
tation. process the expectation that the plan would be periodically reassessed and
refreshed as necessary.
Vision: We envision a thriving region enabled by a best-in-class transit system.
Document Review
Process Design
To begin the work to identify goals and metrics, we needed to gain an understanding
The MBTA identified key components to frame the project process. of the current work and priorities of the MBTA. A review of plans and key documents
was undertaken to understand what goals and commitments had been made by the
• We agreed to focus on the “why” of planning. The process was deemed as
Authority and to gather information from MBTA staff about their department’s goals,
important as the outcomes: it was designed to engage employees and create
data sources, and expectations for the future.
alignment around organizational priorities. We committed to aligning with the
8

--- Page 9 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
Inventory
This review made clear that the MBTA has made commitments to our riders and
the communities we serve to make improvements in service and reliability and to
expand access to transit. Additionally, the goals and metrics in these plans and
documents were not consistent and lacked an overarching focus. There was a lack
of clarity about what the MBTA should prioritize with its limited financial and staffing
resources.
Since the analyzed plans provide significant guidance for the MBTA’s work today,
the findings from this analysis informed the first iteration of the MBTA’s goals and
metrics. This rolling up of existing plans into the goals and metrics made clear that
the Authority is building on existing work with its strategic planning, rather than
starting from a blank canvas.
Facilitation Design
The facilitation process was intentionally structured to engage a broad range of
MBTA staff with diverse roles and experiences. The process included a range of
subject matter experts across the Authority including executive staff, frontline staff,
and union leaders from across the Authority. It was also designed to center MBTA
staff as the subject matter experts for determining the agencies priorities and to
build on the previous strategic planning report and the FTA’s safety management
inspection, that made clear many MBTA challenges are rooted in addressing the
Authority’s internal culture.
The goals and metrics work was driven by cross-departmental working groups, each
with a separate charge. Subject matter experts were assigned to working groups to
draft goals aligned to each of the MBTA’s four values, plus a group focused on a
new area: culture. These groups had honest conversations about the MBTA’s goals,
as well as the interconnections and tradeoffs between goals. A separate group of
subject matter experts also convened to develop draft metrics to track success on
each of the proposed goals.
9

--- Page 10 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
2022 Strategic Planning: Goals and Metrics
Two additional teams, the MBTA’s executive team and the Strategic Planning Com-
Subject Matter Experts: Values and Data Working Groups
mittee for Implementation (SPCI), shaped the structure of the planning process to
ensure maximum engagement from MBTA staff and elevated strategic topics for
Provided crosscutting feedback focused on
leadership discussion.
Union Leadership implementability and the needs of the MBTA’s
Each of the engaged groups is described in more detail below. workforce.
Figure 2: MBTA Staff Engagement Approach Alignment Across Values
Subject Matter Experts: Values and Data Working Groups
Strategic Planning Provided big picture insights and process guidance
Five working groups of MBTA staff subject matter Committee for to ensure a smooth project process, maximum
experts provided insight and expertise to propose Implementation (SPCI) engagement, and feedback on draft deliverables.
Value Specific Working goals aligned to each of the organizational values.
Groups
Provided feedback and sign-off on the project
The groups focused on:
process, outcomes, and all final deliverables before
Safety, Service, Sustainability, Equity, Culture
Executive Team being shared with stakeholders. The General
Manager’s direct reports served as an anchor for all
An inter-departmental group of data experts
the work.
Data + Metrics Group proposed metrics to track the MBTA’s progress in
achieving each goal.
Front Line Employee Perspectives: Crosscutting All Values
Provided input to ensure strategic goals and
DEI Employee Advisory
priorities included a broad range of employee
Council
perspectives.
10

--- Page 11 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
Values Refined
Equity and Culture Value Statements
The process of developing Authority-wide goals and metrics prompted a fresh look
at the MBTA’s pre-existing mission, vision, and values. While there was wide-rang-
ing agreement to carry over the values of safety, service and sustainability from
our previous strategic planning work, the equity and workplace culture participants
acknowledged the need to further define the organization’s values and aspirations
regarding equity and culture to develop more robust goals in these areas. Equity
participants noted that the previous statement had emphasized fairness more than
equity and had not adequately accounted for impacts on geographic areas adjacent
to the MBTA’s service and facilities. The culture group advocated for the creation of
a new value statement which would consolidate the internal priorities set in 2020
(collaboration, communication, and culture; workforce investments; and diversity,
equity, and inclusion) into a single value statement that prioritized people’s well-be-
ing. As a result, the equity and culture working groups, as well as the DEI Employee
Advisory Council, refined the equity statement and drafted a culture statement for
the MBTA.
11

--- Page 12 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
Values
Safety: We put safety at the forefront of our
work.
Service: We endeavor to deliver superior
service connecting people
and communities.
Equity: We commit to prioritizing the needs of
our transit-dependent riders, our employees,
and the economic regions we service in
decision-making processes to eliminate unjust
and unintentional consequences.
Sustainability: We invest resources wisely in
solutions for our team, our communities, and
our environment.
Culture: We aspire to transform our culture into
one that keeps people’s well-being and safety at
the center of everything we do. The MBTA DEI Employee Advisory Council
Accessibility: We commit to removing physical,
operational, and informational barriers so riders
of all abilities can travel with independence and
confidence.
12

--- Page 13 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
Goals and Metrics Development
MBTA Goals and Metrics
As a result of the many working sessions and participant engagement, the MBTA advancing the transportation system of the future, prioritizing safety and reliability,
drafted organization-wide goals and metrics to guide the Authority. The MBTA es- enhancing and increasing system accessibility, and promoting environmental sus-
tablished eight goals for the Authority aligned with the Administration’s priorities of tainability and resiliency.
Values
Safety Service Sustainability Equity Culture
Safety Modernization Transparent Workforce Service and Sustainability Mode Shift Communicating
Empower and support and State of Communication Retain, attract, and Economic and Resilience Attract new riders, Our Costs
staff to develop a culture Good Repair Ensure the experiences invest in a diverse and Vitality Increase the retain existing riders, Communicate openly
which prioritizes and Efficiently modernize and perspectives of qualified workforce that Support the regional environmental and increase the about our costs and
promotes safety assets and improve our staff and riders are represents our ridership vitality by providing a sustainability and percentage of transit- the revenue needed to
connectivity, while accounted for through dependable, frequent, resilience of our trips in the region support our ongoing
ensuring MBTA property transparent decision and accessible service transit system service and the growth
is maintained to a state making that riders love of our system
of good repair
Safety | Equity Safety | Service Sustainability | Equity Equity | Culture Sustainability | Culture Safety | Sustainability Sustainability | Service Sustainability | Equity
| Service
Goals
13

--- Page 14 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
The draft metrics were developed with insight from the data and metrics working
group, which included individuals working on capturing and using data to inform
decisions across many areas of the MBTA. Currently hundreds of data points are
routinely gathered, analyzed and reported upon. However, there is not a single data Increase in:
source that every team member knows about and has access to, and no overarching
metrics that bind the work of the MBTA’s 7,000+ employees and contractors together
for a shared purpose.
Percent of assets modernized and in
Developing draft metrics that span all the MBTA’s operations was met with a sense
a state of good repair
of urgency, as without them work will continue to be siloed and inefficient, and safety
problems will continue to exist. To address this challenge and ensure that data-gath-
ering and data-informed decision-making support the intentions and goals outlined
Rider satisfaction
in the strategic plan, the data and metrics group aimed to cull the indicators and data
points necessary to assess the Authority’s performance at a high level over time.
Employee satisfaction
Figure 3: MBTA Overarching Metrics
High-level metrics can be used to track progress toward goals and report on imple-
mentation.
Mode share
Accessible trips
Reduction in:
Staffing diversity
Injuries, and elimination of
fatalities
Clear goals and metrics help the organization and staff on a day-to-day basis to
align decision-making, especially when every decision is made amid constrained
resources. Through alignment with the mission, vision, and values along with our
The rate of carbon emissions
newly defined goals, we will be better equipped to achieve desired outcomes, mea-
sure success, or determine course corrections via data-driven analytics.
14

--- Page 15 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
What’s Next?
With its goals and metrics complete, the MBTA will turn its attention to how to
implement the goals and track progress toward their completion. We believe
strategic planning is about planning as a process. The overall strategic plan-
ning process the MBTA is undertaking is depicted in Figure 4 and discussed
in more detail below.
Figure 4 : MBTA Strategic Planning Process Overview
MBTA Strategic Planning Process
Evaluate Set the mission, Develop metrics Build and align Understand the Engage Assemble the
outcomes/ vision, goals and to track progress the team to baseline and stakeholders in resources to
reassess/update values achieve initial conduct gap action planning implement goals
actions analysis
X
We are here.
15

--- Page 16 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
Where We Are in the Process and Next Steps ity and external influences change. Metrics will be used to track our progress and
to indicate where a course correction is required, in addition, unforeseen changes in
The MBTA’s strategic planning is iterative and will evolve over time. Internally, we
the environment in which we operate may indicate a need to reevaluate and refine
will be working to communicate the finalized goals and metrics to all staff to ensure
our strategic plan.
they know how their work fits into the big picture. We are in the process of realign-
ing the organizational structure and adding staff to meet the goals set out in our Since the goals arose from an analysis of the MBTA’s existing plans, projects, and
plan. As a next step, we will be assessing our baseline and identifying gaps in how staff-driven priorities, there are many actions already underway to achieve each
our existing work plans address the new Authority-wide goals. We will finalize our goal. While not a comprehensive list, some of the major actions already underway to
Authority-wide metrics in a dashboard and set targets for how much progress we meet and achieve each goal are included below.
can feasibly make toward each goal. We are also developing the baseline data we
will track our progress against. For example, an annual staff survey will provide data Figure 5: 2022 Strategic Planning: Activities Underway
on employee satisfaction, and a workforce assessment will set the baseline for how
many workers we need. Activities Underway
The goals and metrics included in this report will guide the MBTA both in internal
Empower and support staff to develop a culture which prioritizes and
communciation with our staff and external engagement with stakeholders across promotes safety
our service area.
• Safety Management System (SMS) Implementation
The MBTA’s goals and metrics will form the foundation for the Authority’s required
• Distribution of updated Personal Protective Equipment to all staff
planning activities, including Program for Mass Transportation (PMT) and the Capital
Improvement Program. The PMT will provide a public process for stakeholders to Modernize assets while ensuring MBTA property is maintained to a state
of good repair
weigh in on the costs and trade-offs of potential long-term investments based on
the values, goals, and metrics defined by the MBTA, in partnership with MassDOT’s
• Implementation of recommendations in the Transit Asset Management Plan
Office of Transportation Planning. (TAMP)
• Green Line Transformation, Orange Line Transformation,
Internally, we will be working to communicate the finalized goals and metrics to all
and Red Line Transformation programs
staff to ensure each employee understands how their work fits into the big picture.
We will also incorporate the goals into Authority performance management process-
Ensure the experiences and perspectives of our staff and riders are
es and use them to guide MBTA departments in detailing the objectives, strategies, accounted for through transparent decision-making
and activities that the Authority will take in the coming year to address each of the
• DEI Employee Advisory Council
goals.
• Employee Concerns Hotline
A key component of our planning process is to evaluate, reassess, and update. The
• Employee survey
goals and metrics are meant to guide the organization, and will evolve as the Author-
16

--- Page 17 ---
MBTA Strategic Planning Goals and Metrics | Final Report January 2024
Activities Underway Activities Underway
Retain, attract, and invest in a diverse and qualified workforce that Communicate openly about our costs and the revenue needed to support
represents our ridership our ongoing work
• Authority-wide workforce assessment and development of 5-year hiring goals • Continuation of a robust discretionary grant strategy
• Development of new employee resource groups • Using real estate to bring value to the MBTA
• Implementation of multiple new training programs for managers • Refining CIP scoring to ensure all CIP projects advance the goals and reflect
our values
Provide a dependable, frequent, and accessible service that customers love
This strategic planning work represents an opportunity to shape the future of the
MBTA for its riders, its employees, and impacted communities. The strategic plan
• Implementation of Plan for Accessible Transportation Infrastructure (PATI)
will guide the Authority’s work, clarify priorities and projects, and improve transpar-
• Opening of the Mobility Center for individuals with disabilities
ency in the MBTA’s decision-making and performance management. While there is
• Further implementation of the Better Bus Program, including bus priority in
more work to be done to develop objectives and strategies and to create cross-de-
collaboration with municipalities
partmental alignment to achieve these goals, this work represents a turning point
• Beginning work with MassDOT on the next Program for Mass Transportation,
and an opportunity to shape the future of the MBTA and the regions we serve.
which will use the MBTA’s goals
Increase the environmental sustainability and resilience of our transit
system
• Investments in Bus Fleet and Facility Modernization program
• Bus fleet electrification
• Resiliency plans by asset and mode
Attract new riders, retain existing riders, and increase percentage of
transit trips in the region
• Implementing Bus Network Redesign to ensure bus trips are competitive and
attractive to riders
• Opening of South Coast Rail
• Implementation of early recommendations from Rail Vision (clock-face
schedules, new regional rail connections between commuter rail and
Orange Line)
17