--- Page 1 ---
O
STON REG
IO
B N BOSTON REGION METROPOLITAN PLANNING ORGANIZATION
MPO
Monica Tibbits-Nutt, MPO Chair | Secretary and CEO, Massachusetts Department of Transportation
M N
E T R
O
ATI O Tegin Leigh Teich, Executive Director, MPO Staff
P O
LITA
N
PLANNING
OR
G
A
NI Z
WORK PROGRAM
BLUEBIKES AND MBTA CONNECTIONS
OCTOBER 24, 2024
Proposed Motion
The Boston Region Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) votes to approve this
work program.
Project Identification
Unified Planning Work Program (UPWP) Classification
Boston Region MPO Planning Studies and Technical Analyses
Project Number 13819
Client
Boston Region MPO
Project Supervisors
Principal: Rounaq Basu
Manager: Tanner Bonner
Funding Source
MPO Planning Contract and MPO §5303 Contract 126734
Schedule and Budget
Schedule: 11 months after work commences
Budget: $59,452
Schedule and budget details are shown in Exhibits 1 and 2, respectively.
Relationship to MPO Goals
The Boston Region MPO elected to fund this study with its federally allocated
metropolitan planning funds during federal fiscal year (FFY) 2025. The work completed
through this study will address the following goal areas established in the MPO’s Long-
Range Transportation Plan: access and connectivity, mobility and reliability, and equity.
State Transportation Building • Ten Park Plaza, Suite 2150 • Boston, MA 02116-3968 • (857) 702-3700 • bostonmpo.org

--- Page 2 ---
Boston Region MPO 2 October 24, 2024
Background
A well-integrated and safe multimodal network is essential for serving a variety of trip
needs and shifting further away from car-dependent travel. Bikeshare offers significant
utility by connecting with public transit and facilitating multimodal trips throughout the
Boston region. One of its key roles is addressing what is known as the first- and last-
mile problem, making it easier for riders to access transit stations and complete their
trips efficiently without the need of a car. Additionally, Bluebikes can substitute for
transit for trips that may otherwise take longer or be less convenient, offering riders a
flexible and often quicker alternative. In these ways, Bluebikes and the Massachusetts
Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) can both complement and compete with each
other.
Central Transportation Planning Staff, the staff to the MPO, has worked with the MBTA
and the Cities of Boston, Cambridge, and Somerville to understand how riders interact
with the Bluebikes system. This study will allow the MPO to further understand how we
could improve our existing bicycle network and how both Bluebikes and the MBTA can
serve as a more viable option for people to travel.
Staff recently conducted a literature review and an exploratory analysis to develop a
baseline understanding of the complementary relationships between bikeshare and
transit. While we found that a great majority of existing Bluebikes stations are near
MBTA stops, there are still gaps in system connectivity and a variety of factors left
unexplored. With the use of additional data, tools, and methodologies, along with
stakeholder input, staff will build upon this previous work to analyze where the
Bluebikes and the MBTA allow for complementary and competitive trips and how rider
behavior reflects available bikeshare and transit opportunities.
This research complements existing MPO efforts, including a Bluebikes fare equity
analysis and demographic survey, development of a Baseline Equity Metrics
dashboard, and the Boston Region MPO’s Bicycle and Pedestrian program. The
findings could inform continued investment in bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure
projects, cooperative planning efforts between Bluebikes and the MBTA, and other
efforts that may lead to an increase in both Bluebikes and MBTA ridership.
Objective
This work will build on previous research on the interaction between the Bluebikes and
MBTA systems using additional data and expanded methodologies to understand
system connectivity and rider behavior.
Work Description
Staff will conduct analysis and engagement to consider how the Bluebikes system
interacts with the MBTA. This work will analyze where the Bluebikes and the MBTA

--- Page 3 ---
Boston Region MPO 3 October 24, 2024
allow for complementary and competitive trips and how rider behavior reflects available
bikeshare and transit opportunities.
Task 1 Plan and Prepare Analysis
MPO staff will identify specific analysis areas of interest depending on available data
and stakeholder input.
Subtask 1.1 Review Previous Work
MPO staff will organize the analyses in the GitHub repository, holistically review
the findings from our previous work, and identify focus areas for extending the
research.
Subtask 1.2 Consult Stakeholders
To inform data source choices, analysis approach, and delivery of the final work
product, staff will identify and engage with stakeholders who may include
municipal planners, MBTA staff, community groups, bikeshare users, and/or
advocacy organizations.
Subtask 1.3 Identify Data Sources and Analysis Tools
Staff will determine the potential of various datasets (e.g., ridership patterns and
geographic data) to provide more granular insight, with the goal to integrate
advanced analysis tools.
Subtask 1.4 Prepare Data
After data sources and analysis tools are identified, staff will clean and process
data as necessary.
Products of Task 1
A defined approach for analyzing interactions between Bluebikes and the MBTA.
Task 2 Conduct Analysis
Staff will follow the methodology and focus areas of interest formulated in Task 1 to
conduct analysis. Analysts will incorporate feedback from contributors and
stakeholders as appropriate, conduct quality control and management, and decide
on useful metrics and statistics for reporting.
Products of Task 2
A set of analytical findings synthesized from various datasets, including a clear
identification of key gaps and opportunities in the Bluebikes–MBTA network and
existing patterns of multimodal travel behavior.
Task 3 Document and Communicate Results
Before, during, and after the analysis, staff will keep internal documentation up-to
date and explore options for data visualizations and report format. After the analysis,
staff will create a report and communicate the results to the MPO board.

--- Page 4 ---
Boston Region MPO 4 October 24, 2024
Products of Task 3
A report detailing the study motivation, methodology, analysis findings, and key
takeaways (including suggestions for improving transit and bikeshare
integration), along with robust internal documentation.

--- Page 5 ---
Exhibit 1
ESTIMATED SCHEDULE
Bluebikes and MBTA Connections
Month
Task 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
1. Plan and Prepare Analysis
2. Conduct Analysis
3. Document and Communicate
Results
A
Products/Milestones
A: Report

--- Page 6 ---
Exhibit 2
ESTIMATED COST
Bluebikes and MBTA Connections
Direct Salary and Overhead $59,452
Person-Weeks by Pay Grade Direct Overhead Total
Task G-9 G-8 G-7 G-6 Total Salary (120.3%) Cost
1. Plan and Prepare Analysis 0.0 0.7 0.6 4.0 5.3 $8,250 $9,924 $18,174
2. Conduct Analysis 0.0 0.7 0.6 5.0 6.3 $9,675 $11,639 $21,313
3. Document and Communicate
Results 0.5 1.0 0.0 4.0 5.5 $9,062 $10,902 $19,965
Total 0.5 2.4 1.2 13.0 17.1 $26,987 $32,465 $59,452
Other Direct Costs $0
TOTAL COST $59,452
Funding
MPO Planning Contract 126734
MPO §5303 Planning Contract 126734

--- Page 7 ---
Boston Region MPO 5 October 24, 2024
CIVIL RIGHTS NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC
Welcome. Bem Vinda. Bienvenido. Akeyi. 欢迎. 歡迎
You are invited to participate in our transportation planning process, free from
discrimination. The Boston Region Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) is
committed to nondiscrimination in all activities and complies with Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national
origin (including limited English proficiency). Related federal and state
nondiscrimination laws prohibit discrimination on the basis of age, sex, disability, and
additional protected characteristics.
For additional information or to file a civil rights complaint, visit
www.bostonmpo.org/mpo_non_discrimination.
To request this information in a different language or format, please contact:
Boston Region MPO Title VI Specialist
10 Park Plaza, Suite 2150
Boston, MA 02116
Phone: 857.702.3700
Email: civilrights@ctps.org
F or people with hearing or speaking difficulties, connect through the state MassRelay
service, www.mass.gov/massrelay. Please allow at least five business days for your
request to be fulfilled.