--- Page 1 ---
Education
OVERVIEW
The FY25 Boston Public Schools (BPS) FY25 Investments (see Table 1) are grouped
budget builds a foundation for the future. A into four priority areas and are aimed at
robust $1.53 billion in funding will support improving academic outcomes and closing
50,000 students at BPS, and another $287 gaps. These priorities are: Inclusive
million will support approximately 10,400 Education, School Directed Investments,
Boston students in charter schools. Transitioning ESSER Hold Harmless for
Schools, and Planning Beyond ESSER.
The increase of $81 million over the FY24
BPS Adopted operating budget supports the Inclusive Education investments dedicate
district’s aim to provide a high-quality $20 million to increase inclusive practices
experience for every student regardless of and opportunities for all students
school, program, or neighborhood. Boston’s regardless of their need level.
FY25 education budget, including the BPS
School-Directed Investments allocate $6
operating budget and the city’s charter
million to increase investments for special
school tuition assessment, represents
education, school psychologists and
roughly 39% of the city’s budget as a whole.
guidance counselors; for staffing in new
While federal Elementary and Secondary transformation schools; for MassCore
School Emergency Relief (ESSER) funding Implementation; for immediate action in
will expire in FY25, BPS will sustain a share Dual Language and bilingual programs; for
of services currently funded on ESSER that multilingual learners with disabilities; and
are aligned with strategic priorities. These for bilingual teacher pipelines.
efforts are supported both by new funding
Transitioning and Planning Beyond ESSER
and by cost reductions in Central Office
investments allocate $4 million for Hold
and in schools through classroom
Harmless for Schools with increasing
consolidations and reconfigurations.
enrollment and $10 million for Central
office investments in Capital Planning,
FY25 BPS Priority Operating Student Support, and Equitable Literacy.
Investments Budget
BPS OPERATING BUDGET
Inclusive Education $20M
School-Directed $6M At a $1.53 billion appropriation, the FY25
Investments
operating budget (Table 2) maintains a
Transitioning ESSER Hold
Harmless
$4M
trend of significant increases over the past
Planning Beyond ESSER $6M several years. The FY25 allocation makes
investments towards achieving a fully-
Table 1
inclusive, high-performing district for all
students. It does so in the context of the
loss of expiring federal relief funding that
kept learning going during the pandemic,
stabilized schools with declining
enrollment, and sponsored literacy
programs, classroom supports, and other
impactful programming. The budget seeks
to sustain the progress that has been made
in the face of challenges shared by large
E d u c a t i o n 7 9

--- Page 2 ---
urban districts across Massachusetts and In FY25, the Central Administration budget
the nation as a whole. will increase by 20% to $109 million, to
ensure organizational effectiveness,
accountability, and strong coordination and
BPS Operating Budget Summary support from district leadership.
FY24 FY25 $ Around $17 million in collective bargaining
Adopted Adopted Change
increases were carried on ESSER in FY24
Direct School
Expenses $905M $943M $26M and will be moving to the operating budget
School Services
Budgeted in FY25. In all, so-called Salary Transition
Centrally $382M $421M $28M Costs previously carried on other funding
Central
Administration $91M $109M $12M sources will contribute another $10 million
Non-BPS Student to the year over year growth.
Services $67M $59M $5M
Salary Transition
On top of the BPS base budget, $36 million
Costs -$17M* -$6M $10M
in FY25 BPS operating investments aim to
Total BPS Budget $1.446B $1.527B $81M
deliver on the promise of educational
equity and excellence. FY25 investments
*Not factored into FY24 total
Table 2 target four priority areas: Inclusive
Education, School Directed Investments,
Looking at spending categories, funding
Transitioning ESSER Hold Harmless for
directly in schools will increase by $38
Schools with increasing enrollment, and
million from the FY24 budget to $943
Planning Beyond ESSER.
million.
A $20 million investment in Inclusive
In addition to school budgets, schools
Education Strategy will develop inclusive
receive significant support from services
environments in a subset of schools
that are budgeted centrally. This includes
through structural changes, new staffing,
items such as transportation, particular
and professional training. Out of $20
special education services, and facilities
maintenance. This portion of the budget million, $15.1 million will fund Inclusion
will increase 10% from the FY24 budget to Planning Team (IPT) requests for staffing to
$421 million. With these support funds meet the needs of Students with Disabilities
added to funds budgeted at the school (SWDs) and Multilingual Learners (MLs).
level, $1.36 billion is expected to be spent $2.7 million will increase specialized
on school services, nearly 90% of the BPS services and supports for MLs with
budget. disabilities in substantially separate
classrooms. $2.2 million are being reserved
BPS is also responsible for funding services
to provide additional funding to schools
for students living in Boston and attending
later in the rollout process.
school outside of BPS, including adult
education students, students placed out-
In FY25, $6 million in School-Directed
of-district for special education and
Investments will be made to continue
vocational education, and pre-kindergarten
building the foundation for the future,
students at community-based
including Coordinators of Special
organizations. In addition, BPS provides
Education, school psychologists and school
transportation for out-of-district special
education students, and these costs counselors, instructional coaches and
comprise approximately 21% of the FY25 specialist teachers in new Transformation
BPS Adopted transportation budget. Total Schools, and MassCore (High School
funds budgeted for non-BPS students will graduation requirements) implementation.
decrease from the FY24 budget to $59
million, comprising around 4% of the A $4 million investment in transitioning
overall FY25 BPS Adopted budget. from ESSER Hold Harmless will reinstate a
portion of supplementary funds carried on
8 0 E d u c a t i o n

--- Page 3 ---
ESSER in FY24 to support schools with Direct School Staffing based on classroom
increasing enrollment projections in FY25. compositions and formulas to determine
special staffing needs. The special
In FY25 BPS is also making a $6 million education budget totals over $421 million in
investment in planning beyond ESSER for FY25, an increase of $43 million, or 11.4%,
Equitable Literacy, Students Supports, from the FY24 budget. The special
Capital Planning, and other areas. education budget accounts for nearly a
quarter of the total BPS budget and
In addition to the investments mentioned supports the over 11,400 students with
above, the $81 million increase in FY25 BPS disabilities, or about 24% of the BPS
budget also includes support for School- student population.
Directed Investments, Multilingual,
The significant increase in special
Multicultural Program and Services,
education teachers in the FY25 budget
Equitable Literacy, Family and Community
aligns with the continued inclusion rollout
Engagement, and increased costs for
across the district and into new grade
transportation, facilities, extended learning
levels, as well as commitments made in the
time costs, and food services.
district’s systemic improvement plan
Early Childhood Education agreement with the Commonwealth.
In addition to mainstream or substantially
The City continues to expand the number
separate placements in the district, BPS is
of quality pre-kindergarten seats as part of
responsible for the educational services of
the Universal Pre-K (UPK) initiative. In the
special education students in out-of-
2024-2025 school year, about 4,800 three-
district placements. Over time, BPS has
and four-year-olds are expected to be
seen an increase in the number of high-
enrolled in a quality pre-kindergarten
need students and DCF-involved students
program. The City’s Quality Pre-K Fund has
placed in group homes who require private
enabled and accelerated this expansion
placement. BPS expects to be fully or partly
over the last several years, and an ongoing
responsible for paying for services for
partnership between BPS and the City’s
roughly 400 students, at a total projected
Office of Early Childhood will support
cost of $44 million in FY25. Some of the
Mayor Wu’s vision of universal, affordable,
costs for these services will be reimbursed
high-quality early education for all infants,
by Circuit Breaker. Tuition rates are
toddlers, and children under five. Changes
established by the Commonwealth of
since Mayor Wu took office include
Massachusetts Rate Setting Commission.
updating the funding model from seats to
classrooms, opening participation to three- BPS is also responsible for providing
year-olds, and integrating family child care education services to students with IEPs in
providers into the UPK system.. private placements. To better support these
students, the FY25 budget continues to
BPS early education programs have been
fund a proportionate share team
recognized as among the most effective in
responsible for conducting IEP meetings
the nation at closing achievement gaps.
and evaluations.
They are content-rich in science, literacy,
arts and math. Data shows that BPS pre-
English Learners
kindergarten attendees outperform their
peers in third and fifth grade MCAS, in both The Bilingual/Sheltered English Immersion
ELA and Math. budget totals $125.9 million in FY25, a
decrease of $5 million, or -3.8%, from the
Special Education
FY24 budget. Approximately a third (33%) of
BPS students have an ELL designation; as a
The FY25 BPS budget makes robust
group, they hail from approximately 145
investments in special education through
different countries and speak 90 languages.
the Office of Specialized Services and
E d u c a t i o n 8 1

--- Page 4 ---
This year’s Bilingual/Sheltered English included students with disabilities, English
Immersion budget decrease is due to a Language Learners, and vocational
combination of re-coding positions and education students. A school’s budget was
changing how educators are classified in calculated by adding the individual funding
BPS systems, as well as updates in the amounts for every student projected to
number of minutes required, changes in the attend that school in the fall. Additionally,
definition for SEI classrooms, and each school also received a foundation
consolidation of classrooms. budget to support essential staff.
When enrollment declines at a school, the
BPS Enrollment
BPS central office works closely with the
Student enrollment is the foundation of the school to appropriately adjust staffing.
BPS budget. The preliminary stage of the Particular care is made through this
budget process involves enrollment process to ensure classrooms are full so
projections for each program, grade, and that they are affordable to schools. There
school, which are based on historic trends are supports in place to assist schools with
and current data. The projected enrollment declines in enrollment, such as rules-based
at each school for the upcoming school soft landings and other reserves that are
year helps determine the allocation of used throughout the budgeting process.
resources at the school level. The FY25
In FY25 budgeting at the school level began
budget development process required close
with existing operating allocations from
collaboration between school leaders and
FY24. The number and mix of classrooms in
BPS Finance to develop accurate
schools was then adjusted based on
enrollment projections.
enrollment and student need. From there
BPS projected enrollment for FY25 is schools were given investment funding for
approximately 50,205. The district has seen inclusive education and other changes to
steady enrollment decline over the last 7 ESL and Special Education services. Finally,
years, driven by broader demographic a set of schools with increasing enrollment
trends, with fewer students living in Boston were allowed to move hold harmless funds
and entering the district as birth rates from ESSER to the operating budget in
decline and the cost of living continues to order to enhance their capacity.
rise. Driven by Multilingual Learners, the
district’s enrollment was larger as of June
2023 than had been anticipated. Since
EXTERNAL FUNDS
FY20, BPS per pupil spending has increased
by $9,700 and is expected to exceed External funds are provided directly to BPS
$30,000 in FY25. The district continues to through formula grants (entitlements),
consolidate classrooms when appropriate. competitive grants, reimbursement
accounts, and other grants, primarily from
Reimagine School Funding state and federal sources. These external
funds are critical to the success of the
FY25 will be a transition year away from
district, and at $153.7M represent 9.1% of
Weighted Student Funding (WSF) as BPS
total funding in FY25, down from 12% in
builds a new framework called Reimagine
FY15 (Figure 1). Decreased external funding
School Funding. The weighted student
was identified as a challenge to BPS’s long-
funding model created a baseline per-
term financial stability in the district’s 2016
student funding amount and then adjusted
Long-Term Financial Plan, with the BPS
the amount depending on individual
budget relying on increased City
student need. For example, students whose
appropriations to help absorb costs.
family income was at or below the poverty
level would receive additional funding in
the formula. Other needs-based weights
8 2 E d u c a t i o n

--- Page 5 ---
School Improvement Grants: In FY25, BPS
will receive an estimated $800K from the
commonwealth through targeted
assistance grant funding. Targeted
assistance grant funding is provided to the
lowest performing schools in BPS, also
known as turnaround or transformation
schools, to increase professional
development, add staff, and provide other
supports. In FY25, 39 BPS schools will be
eligible for this funding. As school
improvement grants end for each school
exiting turnaround status, the district shifts
these activities to the operating budget to
continue the work of turning around low-
performing schools. The FY25 budget
includes $665K in funding to transition
Figure 1 - External Funds as % of Total
Madison Park Vocational High, Grew
Funds FY15-23 Actuals, FY24 Appropriation,
Elementary, Excel High School, English
FY25 Adopted
High School, and Brighton High, where
One of the largest sources of federal previous school improvement grants have
revenue for BPS is the Title I entitlement ended or funding is tapering.
grant. BPS expects to leverage $43 million
in Title I revenue in FY25. The grant’s Federal Relief Funding
purpose is to improve the academic
BPS received $390 million via the federal
achievement of disadvantaged students by
Elementary and Secondary School
ensuring that all students have an equal
Emergency Relief (ESSER) Fund. During the
opportunity to obtain a high-quality
period of FY22 to FY24, the increase in the
education. The grant provides direct funds
percentage of external funds as a share of
to schools with higher levels of poverty.
total BPS funds (Figure 1) reflects COVID-19
BPS receives two external revenue sources relief funding. ESSER spending totaled
to fund the district’s comprehensive special around $65 million in FY22 and at least $130
education program. Through Circuit million in FY23. Including FY24, total
Breaker reimbursements, the anticipated spending is $370 million.
Commonwealth shares the cost of Though not officially budgeted, BPS is
educating students with disabilities once expecting to carry roughly $19.5 million in
the cost to educate those students exceeds ESSER funding forward into FY25.
a threshold amount. BPS has budgeted
ESSER allocations directly to schools
approximately $26.2 million in Circuit
amounted to $50M in both FY23 and FY24,
Breaker revenue in FY25. Additionally,
with schools having some discretion on
funds provided through the federal
how to spend those dollars in ways that
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
would be most transformational. The
(IDEA) grant enable the district to provide
district also has numerous central ESSER
special education services in the least
initiatives aligned with its strategic
restrictive environment possible for
academic priorities. Because relief funding
children with disabilities ages three
will no longer be available in FY25, the
through twenty-one, and to provide early
district is currently working to spend funds
intervention services for children from
down and to plan for how to sustain critical
birth through age two. BPS expects to have
positions and services that are paid out of
almost $18 million in IDEA funds available in
this funding source. A $4 million investment
FY25.
for transitioning ESSER Hold Harmless for
E d u c a t i o n 83

--- Page 6 ---
schools with increasing enrollment and an decade earlier, with a decrease of 319
additional $6 million for Planning Beyond students dropping out annually across the
ESSER, including around 60 positions, from decade.
federal relief to the general fund in FY25, is
According to state guidelines, students in
a step in that direction.
grades 6-12 are counted as dropouts if they
leave school during the year for any reason
PERFORMANCE
other than transfer, graduation, death, or
BPS is committed to using data to improve expulsion with an option to return.
school performance and provide the best
education to students. In FY21, the district Accountability Results
created a new performance management
The Massachusetts Department of
system based on six anchor goals: eliminate
Elementary and Secondary Education
opportunity and achievement gaps,
(DESE) implemented a new accountability
accelerate learning, amplify all voices,
system in the fall of 2018, which determines
expand opportunity, cultivate trust, and
schools’ need for assistance or intervention
activate partnerships. Each goal was paired
based on a set of accountability indicators
with a series of aligned metrics to measure
including student growth, graduation rate,
progress. Entering FY25, BPS has been
and chronic absenteeism.
evaluating its progress towards academic
goals using measurable outcomes for Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, DESE did
several years. not issue school or district accountability
determinations in the 2019-2020 and 2020-
Graduation Rates 2021 school years; for 2021-2022 DESE
pursued an “accountability lite” model
The overall four-year graduation rate for
featuring published data but no
the BPS class of 2023 was 80.5%, a slight
determinations. For the 2022-2023 school
decrease compared to the 2022 rate. The
year accountability classifications resumed,
graduation rate increased 14.6 percentage
with BPS being assessed as “Not requiring
points over the decade, from 65.9% in 2013.
assistance or intervention” based on
In 2022 twenty Boston high schools substantial progress toward targets.
achieved graduation rates of 80% or above: Meanwhile four BPS schools were named
Edward M. Kennedy Academy for Health Schools of Recognition: the Joseph P. Tynan
Careers, O'Bryant School of Math & Elementary School, the Oliver Hazard Perry
Science, Boston Latin School, Boston Latin School, the John F. Kennedy School, and the
Academy, Quincy Upper School, Boston Joseph P. Manning School.
Arts Academy, New Mission High School,
In March 2020, as the result of a district
East Boston High School, Fenway High
review by DESE, BPS and DESE entered into
School, TechBoston Academy, Dearborn 6-
a partnership to improve the district’s
12 STEM Academy, Lyon High School,
lowest performing schools, to continue to
Boston Community Leadership Academy,
address systemic barriers to equity across
Henderson K-12 Inclusion School Upper,
the school system, and to support its most
Boston Green Academy, Another Course To
vulnerable students to achieve their highest
College, English High School, Madison Park
educational potential.
Technical Vocational High School, Snowden
International High School, Margarita Muniz As part of that partnership, BPS committed
Academy. to four priority initiatives: make
improvements in BPS schools included
Dropout Rate
among the lowest performing 10% of
schools in the state; address instructional
The overall dropout rate for grades 9-12 in
rigor, equitable access to advanced
school year 2022-2023 was 4.5%. BPS cut
coursework, and chronic absenteeism at
the dropout rate by 23.7% relative to a
8 4 E d u c a t i o n

--- Page 7 ---
the high school level; improve educational story facility that will accommodate 650
services for students with disabilities; and students. In addition, the Horace Mann
improve on-time arrival of school buses. School will be temporarily relocated to the
BPS has also committed to a long-term former Edwards School in Charlestown,
initiative to develop a plan for improving following a $46 million building renovation.
services to English learners and improve
Construction on the new $111 million Carter
interpretation and translation services for
School is on schedule. The new building will
limited English proficient parents and
be ready for students in September 2025.
guardians.
Renovation of the former Irving School
To assist in a holistic understanding of the building will also be completed for a
progress that BPS made toward these goals, September 2025 school opening. The
DESE undertook a follow-up district review renovated building will support the merger
of BPS in March 2022. The review found of the Philbrick-Sumner schools.
that progress had been made in multiple
Final programming and design work will
areas but that persistent challenges
begin for the renovation project at Madison
remained. The resulting systemic
Park Technical Vocational High School. A
improvement plan succeeds the 2020
feasibility study is expected to begin, in
agreement with DESE and focuses on many
partnership with the MSBA, for a
of the same areas, as well as student safety,
consolidated school, combining the Shaw
facilities, and data integrity. The City is
and Taylor schools. In addition, BPS will
working to meet the new commitments by
pursue building improvements to facilitate
the deadlines stipulated in the plan and is
grade reconfigurations at various schools.
receiving significant support from the
commonwealth, including an expected $10 The City will also continue district-wide
million in funding over three years. investments in window replacements,
bathroom upgrades, fire systems, radiator
BPS CAPITAL covers, entryway improvements, plumbing
and fixture upgrades to expand drinking
The city is committed to modernizing
water availability, school yards, security
Boston’s public-schools infrastructure.
improvements, and technology
With city bond funds and a strong working
infrastructure, as well as leveraging the
relationship with the Massachusetts School
MSBA accelerated repair program to fund
Building Authority (MSBA), the capital plan
roof, window, and boiler repairs.
includes 72 projects and programs with a
total budget over $1.3 billion. The FY25-29 capital plan sustains and
supports planning for large-scale projects
Implementing a long-term facilities
coming out of the BPS capital engagement
improvements plan for Boston Public
process. The FY25-29 capital plan projects
Schools plan will result in new school
$920 million in BPS-related spending over
buildings and major transformations,
the next five years.
reconfigurations to align schools with K-
6/7-12 and K-8/9-12 pathways, and
CHARTER SCHOOL TUITION
increased investments district-wide for all
school buildings and communities. The Commonwealth charter schools, which are
ongoing planning process is focused on granted charters by the Massachusetts
creating high-quality, twenty-first-century Board of Elementary and Secondary
learning environments for students, and in Education, are publicly-funded schools
so doing close opportunity gaps for more administered independently from local
students. school districts and district bargaining
rules and regulations. Commonwealth
In September 2024, Boston Public Schools
charter schools are primarily financed by
welcomed students to the new Josiah
Quincy Upper School, a $223 million, six-
E d u c a t i o n 8 5

--- Page 8 ---
each student’s sending district through
per-pupil-based tuition.
Commonwealth charter schools are
projected to educate approximately 10,400
Boston students in FY25. Boston is assessed
by the Commonwealth to fund charter
schools on a per-pupil basis, and the City’s
FY25 charter school tuition assessment is
projected to increase by $6.2 million to a
total of $287.3 million primarily due to
higher per-pupil tuition rates.
As of FY24, Boston’s charter school
assessment had nearly tripled since the
enactment of the 2010 Achievement Gap
legislation. This has put increasing pressure
on the City to fund education, as overall
state support decreased for charter school
tuition costs. Following passage of the
Student Opportunity Act (SOA) in 2019,
Boston and other municipalities across the
Commonwealth anticipated an increase in
state education aid, including full of
funding of charter school reimbursement
costs. The Commonwealth fully funded the
SOA in Year 1 to Year 3 (FY22 to FY24), and
is committed to fully fund Year 4 (FY25) in
the state budget. However, due to a variety
of factors, including enrollment and
inflation, Boston has remained a minimum
aid community. In fact, State education aid
in FY25 will enter negative territory,
meaning that Charter tuition costs are
projected to exceed the combination of
Charter reimbursement and Chapter 70 aid.
See the Revenue Estimates and Analysis
section of Volume I for more details on
state education aid and charter school
tuition reimbursement.
8 6 E d u c a t i o n